on 20 april 1999, a massacre occurred at columbine high school in littleton, colorado, a suburb of denver.
twelve students, one teacher, and the two perpetrators, eric harris and dylan klebold, who planned the massacre over a two year period, were killed.
the perpetrators, who died from self inflicted wounds, were considered disaffected outcasts, frequently abused by school athletes.
because of the uneasiness of students, their classes were moved to the neighboring school chatfield.
vice president gore addressed 70,000 attendees at a memorial service and republican presidential candidate pat buchanan cited the incident as rationale for stricter gun laws.
****
in the worst school killing in u.s. history, two students at columbine high school in littleton, colorado, a denver suburb, entered their school on tuesday, april 20, 1999, to shoot and bomb.
at the end 15 were dead and dozens injured.
the dead included the two students, eric harris and dylan klebold, who killed themselves.
harris and klebold were enraged by what they considered taunts and insults from classmates and had planned the massacre for more than a year.
the school is a sealed crime scene and columbine students will complete the school year at a nearby high school.
****
in littleton, colorado on tuesday morning, april 20, 1999, columbine high school students eric harris and dylan klebold, wearing black trench coats, entered their school with guns and pipe bombs.
they killed 12 students and teacher dave sanders before killing themselves.
they planned the massacre for a year, enraged by classmates' taunts and insults.
many victims were in the cafeteria.
investigators believed the gunmen had help from others.
columbine remained closed and students were to finish the school year at nearby chatfield high.
copycat threats occurred nationwide.
the world grieved with columbine.
vp al gore spoke at the memorial.
****
the worst school killing in us history occurred tuesday 20 april at columbine high school in a denver suburb.
two students, enraged at treatment by schoolmates, killed 12 students and one teacher and wounded dozens before killing themselves.
the entire nation mourned the massacre.
on sunday vice president gore and the colorado governor addressed an outdoor memorial service attended by 70,000.
the school was closed and turned into a crime scene, as police investigated whether others were involved.
classes were scheduled to resume at a neighboring school, which the school's 1965 students would share for the remainder of the year.
****

on 4 february 1999, four white nypd officers, mcmellon, carroll, boss, and murphy, fired 41 shots at suspected african immigrant criminal amadou diallo.
charged with second degree murder and reckless endangerment, officers pled not guilty but risked 25 years to life.
judge collins set bail at $100,000 for each officer.
federal entities, the fbi and justice department participated in the investigation.
both jesse jackson and al sharpton interjected themselves into the trial and 1203 protesters were arrested.
a principal result of the policemen's case was an examination of police attitudes and tactics across the nation.
****
amadou diallo was an unarmed immigrant from guinea killed by 4 white police officers in new york city on february 4, 1999.
a grand jury indicted the officers who were arraigned on criminal charges of second degree murder.
the officers pled not guilty.
the trial date is january 3, 2000.
each officer has separate legal counsel, but there is dissension among their attorneys.
the prosecutor is robert johnson, bronx district attorney.
diallo's parents are represented by johnnie cochran who states they will file a civil suit as well.
the case has received extensive public and political attention.
****
a trial date of jan.3, 2000 has been set for the anadol diallo case.
four new york city police officers are charged with second degree murder of 22-year-old immigrant street vendor from guinea when on feb. 4, 1999 they fired 41 shots of which 19 hit the unarmed victim.
the four officers, kenneth boss, jean carroll, edward mcmellon and richard murphy pleaded not guilty maintaining that they thought diallo was armed.
bronx district attorney robert johnson charged that the officers intended to take diallo's life.
****
a grand jury indicted four white new york city police officers for the february 4 fatal shooting of unarmed african immigrant, amadou diallo, struck by 19 of 41 rounds in the vestibule of his bronx apartment building.
edward mcmellon, sean carroll, kenneth boss and richard murphy were each charged with two counts of second-degree murder and one count of reckless endangerment.
the four, who pleaded not guilty, face possibly 25 years to life in prison.
at their arraignment, bail was set at $100,000 each.
they will remain on restricted duty pending the outcome of the trial, set for january 3.
****
the giant panda population of china, which dwindled to approximately 1100 in the 1980's, has slowly increased to approximately 1890 in the wild.
their preservation is desired not only in the interest of biodiversity but also because they are considered china's national gem.
the principal threats to their continued existence are poaching, mining, logging, and diminution of bamboo forests, their main food source.
to counteract such threats, china has established nature reserves, increased forest covers, educated citizens about panda protection, established a panda research center and a blood bank, searched for distressed pandas, and made inter-zoo transfers for biodiversity.
****
the giant panda is one of the world's most endangered species with about 1500 living in the wild in china.
destruction of natural forest has been countered by government creation of nature preserves and genetic research programs, but starvation remains a threat.
the panda's preferred diet, arrow bamboo, flowers at the end of its life, then seeds and dies with replacement growth taking ten years.
programs to reseed arrow bamboo and move giant pandas have prevented extinction, but poachers, mining and logging continue to threaten.
****
there are about 1590 giant pandas remaining in the wild, all in china.
under state protection since 1962, they continue to be threatened by construction, mining, logging, poaching, and recent food shortages.
priority is being given to increasing the forests and planting more bamboo.
the government set up over 50 reserves and organized teams to rescue and relocate weak or injured animals.
exchange programs between habitats help maintain biodiversity.
panda blood is studied to aid in breeding and to support panda rescue.
during the early 2000's the panda population has increased, and pandas have been observed returning to former habitats.
****
the giant panda is one of the world's most endangered species.
called china's ``national treasure, ''they may date from the mesozoic era.
some 1600 live in the wild with less than 200 in captivity.
they are threatened by human civilization, starvation, and bad weather.
to save the panda, china is creating and expanding wildlife reserves and protection zones, planting forest areas with arrow bamboo, increasing financial support, rescuing sick or starving animals, and educating local inhabitants.
a panda blood bank is studying blood types and inbreeding is discouraged.
china wants the main habitat declared a world heritage area.
****
a tsunami ravaged the northern coast of papua new guinea during the night of 17 july 1998, when a magnitude 7.0 undersea earthquake caused a 23 foot wall of water to strike the west sepik province villages of aitape, nimas, warapu, arop, and teles-lambu.
among the area's approximate population of ten thousand, 599 are dead and 6000 homeless from beach abodes constructed of very fragile jungle materials.
the australian air force provided three c130 transports to ferry supplies to the devastated area.
australia also was sending a mobile hospital and doctors.
queen elizabeth sent regrets.
****
during the night of july 17, a 23-foot tsunami hit the north coast of papua new guinea ( png), triggered by a 7.0 undersea earthquake in the area.
at least four villages were hit, three completely destroyed.
a government station, a catholic mission, and a community school were destroyed.
the death toll, officially 599 by july 19, is expected to rise considerably.
thousands are injured, hundreds missing, and up to 6,000 are homeless.
the png defense force, police, health services, and the png red cross have been mobilized.
australia will transport relief supplies and provide a mobile hospital and medical personnel.
****
on a friday night in mid-july 1998, a 23-foot tsunami engulfed a heavily populated area near aitape on papua new guinea's remote northwest coast.
the tsunami followed 30 minutes after an undersea earthquake 18 miles off the coast, measuring 7.0 on the richter scale.
the death toll was 599 but could rise to 2,000.
hundreds were missing and up to 6000 could be homeless.
most of the dead were children and old people.
seven villages were completely destroyed, including nimas, warapu, and arop.
three australian c130s were bringing food, medical supplies and personnel and a mobile hospital.
****
a 23-feet tsunami struck the remote northwest coast of papua new guinea the night of friday 17 july, totally destroying three villages and almost completely destroying another.
the death toll, mostly children and old people, has reached 59 but is expected to rise to more than 1000 and there are thousands of injured and homeless, with no food or water.
australia is sending medical supplies and food and is expecting to set up a mobile hospital.
the tidal wave was caused by an undersea earthquake measuring about 7.0 on the richter scale some 12 miles off the coast.
****
parkinson's is a slowly progressing brain disease extensively researched in the u.s., as it affects 1.5 million americans, sufferers including muhammad ali, janet reno, and michael fox.
symptoms include difficulty in walking and pronouncing words, tremors, and stiffness.
supporters of embryonic stem cell research are hopeful it will lead to the amelioration of parkinson's.
the national institute on aging is studying a gene which when mutated causes parkinson's.
university of pittsburgh researchers are studying exercise as a parkinson's preventer, findings in rats showing that heightened activity led to reduced brain degeneration.
****
parkinson's disease is a degenerative nerve disorder in which certain proteins, such as alpha-synuclein, clump abnormally around brain cells.
parkinson's involves the loss of cells that produce the neuro-transmitter dopamine, leading to tremors and stiffness and a deterioration of mobility and speech.
although parkinson's is not inherited, scientists studied two families with a history of the disease and they have isolated a gene whose mutations have been linked to the disease.
treatment involves medications that increase dopamine levels, and exercise may help slow the disease.
stem-cell research may lead to a cure for parkinson's but it is a controversial issue.
****
parkinson's is a degenerative brain disease characterized by tremors, stiffness and difficulty walking.
it affects 1.5 million americans, including michael j.
fox, muhammad ali and janet reno, also pope john paul ii and possibly yasser arafat.
it caused fox to leave acting and the pope to cut back on travel.
parkinson's, usually not inherited, is associated with lewy bodies in the brain, the protein alpha-synuclein, mutations of chromosome 12 genes, and dopamine loss.
embryonic stem cell research may contribute to a cure.
protein gdnf and exercise could be beneficial.
treatment aimed at stopping proteins from clumping around neurons is problematic.
****
parkinson's is a degenerative brain disease.
there is no cure and the condition worsens with age.
patients have tremors, difficulty pronouncing words, and rigid and slow movement.
the disease if characterized by the loss of cells producing the neurotransmitter dopamine, the protein alpha-synuclein, and clumping of proteins in the brain.
sufferers include world leaders and celebrities and 1.5 million americans.
treatments increase dopamine.
exercise may slow progression.
many hope stem cell research -- well funded in california -- will find a cure.
not generally inherited, the national institute on aging has associated two mutations in chromosome 12 in two disparate families.
****
vioxx, an arthritis drug used by 2 million people, was withdrawn from the market by merck, after determination that use past 18 months increased the risk of heart attack or strokes, one researcher estimating a resultant 30,000 to 100,000 deaths.
the withdrawal brought attention to the issues of advertising and fda oversight.
critics complained that tv advertising caused arthritics to desire the drug when otc drugs cost less and worked equally well.
congress questioned if the fda devoted sufficient time to approval.
senator grassley opined whether there was too cozy an arrangement between the fda and drug companies.
****
on sept 30, merck voluntarily recalled the pain killer vioxx, used by almost 2 million, after clinical trials for its use in colon cancer showed unacceptable rates of stroke/heart attack.
results corroborated earlier warnings that had not resulted in recalls by the food and drug administration ( fda).
as a cox inhibitor, vioxx was safer for digestive tracts, important for arthritis patients.
merck's advertising campaigns did not clearly warn about side effects.
the case highlighted concerns about drug manufacturers' advertising and fdas role in insuring safety of drugs on the market.
safety of other cox inhibitors is now a concern.
****
on september 30, merck & co. voluntarily withdrew its arthritis drug vioxx, prescribed for some 20 million people worldwide, because recent scientific study results indicate that long-term use significantly increases patients' risk of heart attack and stroke over those taking older nsaid drugs.
merck is facing numerous lawsuits alleging it made false and misleading statements about the drug's safety.
documents show that, seven weeks before the withdrawal, fda officials downplayed the significance of the recent findings and silenced one of its own experts who raised concerns.
similar cox-2 inhibitor drugs manufactured by other companies are now coming under scrutiny.
****
in 2004, merck withdrew arthritis drug vioxx, approved in 1999.
risks were suspected in 2000.
recent trials showed that after 18 months, risk of heart attack or stroke outweighed the benefit of easing stomach problems.
vioxx blocked one prostaglandin, rather than both like cheaper non-prescription pain relievers, raising risk 4-5 times and possibly causing 30,000-100,000 heart attacks and strokes.
merck stock sank as it faced lawsuits.
concerns arose over pfizer's celebrex and bextra, also cox-2 inhibitors.
tv advertising led to vioxx use by millions.
fda is criticized for suppressing warnings and letting companies monitor their products' dangers.
congress is investigating.
****
the h5n1 strain of influenza a, commonly termed bird flu, has resurfaced, this time in hong kong, where there has been 10 confirmed cases with 4 deaths, victims not restricted to age or sex.
the virus, which causes fever and respiratory problems is believed to originate with chickens, great scrutiny now given to chicken imports from china, but whose officials disclaim such findings for their exports.
the world health organization has debated vaccine development and further says it has not become an epidemic and recommend those seemingly exposed build up body resistance through good diet, rest, and exercise.
****
health authorities in hong kong reported a small but growing number of people infected with an h5n1 strain of influenza suspected to be transferred from birds to humans.
in a 1-month period, 10 suspected cases were reported and 9 confirmed, including 4 deaths.
transmission modes remain unknown.
the world health organization and the centers for disease control are investigating.
nearby macao reports no cases.
impact on poultry farmers has been substantial with at least a 30% decline in sales.
authorities are concerned of possible effects on the tourist industry.
inspections of poultry farms have started.
****
``bird flu ''( h5n1) a deadly influenza previously found only in birds, has killed four humans in hong kong.
chickens may be the source; the means of transmission is unknown.
human-human transmission is unlikely but possible.
poultry farms were examined, but no evidence of h5n1 was found in the primary source of hong kong's chicken, scenzhen.
to control the spread of the disease, the hong kong health department has advised residents to use proper hygiene, maintain body resistance through diet and exercise, purchase and handle meat with caution, avoid contact with birds, and report any fever or respiratory difficulties.
****
a mysterious, deadly influenza strain, h5n1, has appeared in hong kong with nine confirmed and ten suspected cases.
four people have died.
there have been no cases of this ``bird flu ''outside hong kong.
the source and means of transmission are unknown, although scientists believe it is through contact with chickens or their feces.
there is no evidence of human-to-human transmissions and no infected chickens have been found the hong kong government is coordinating interdepartmental efforts to prevent and control the spread of this ``bird flu ''.
the world health organization has been asked to alert vaccine production centers.
****
a 64,000 square mile watershed, the chesapeake bay had been a rich source of seafood.
maryland, virginia, and pennsylvania recognized that the bay's environmental decline severely affected their economies and in 2000 agreed to actions to save the bay within 10 years, removing it from the national ``impaired water ''list.
however, five years later the chesapeake bay foundation said bay quality had declined.
there were some successes.
the oyster recovery partnership planted millions of disease free oyster seeds; law suits were filed to decrease nitrogen levels; and ecosystem-based management was introduced to recognize the interdependence of ecological resources.
****
despite cleanup efforts initiated in 2000, the chesapeake bay's oyster population has fallen sharply and reached a historic low.
important bay water filters and indicators of the bay?s health, oysters were once the mainstay of the region's fishing industry.
pollution, low oxygen and disease have caused their devastating decline.
government regulators are now implementing an ecosystem-based management plan.
managed reserves of seeded oyster beds have produced limited success.
scientists are exploring the possibility of introducing disease-resistant nonnative chinese oysters to the bay.
bay conservationists have successfully reversed the loss of important water-filtering bulrush marshes by eradicating voracious nonnative nutria rodents.
****
life in the chesapeake bay is threatened by over-harvesting, pollution, parasites, and the introduction of non-native species.
the oyster population has been severely affected.
fishermen, scientists, academics, and government are working together, establishing reserves with stricter harvesting guidelines and harvest-free sanctuaries.
a heartier species may be introduced, pending evaluation.
federal regulators are testing'ecosystem-based management 'of resources in the bay, primarily the striped bass and atlantic menhaden.
however, results are depressing midway through a 10-year bay clean-up program; bureaucracy and insufficient funding are blamed for hampering clean-up efforts, with suits being lodged against the epa for dragging its heels.
****
the chesapeake bay's once thriving populations of fish, crabs, and oysters are vanishing and the industries surrounding them have all but collapsed, because the bay has been over harvested and is heavily polluted from sewage, animal manure, and fertilizers from farms.
an agreement made in 2000 among the environmental protection agency, washington, d.c., maryland, virginia, and pennsylvania to clean up the bay has stagnated and after four years most efforts are still in the planning stage.
in the past government regulators set population targets for each species separately; now they look at the bay as one single ecosystem.
****
in boulder, colorado, six-year-old jonbenet ramsey was found murdered in the basement of her parents' home on december 26, 1996.
intense media attention publicized leaks from police and attorneys, and public speculation.
a homicide investigator publicly resigned saying ramseys were being set up.
in june 98 the case was handed over to the da; in october a new police chief took office.
on september 15, the grand jury started work.
following public criticism, the da appointed 2 special prosecutors in september 1998.
no charges have been filed.
public charges of bungling have been made against the police and the da.
****
six-year-old jonbenet ramsey was found beaten and strangled on dec. 26, 1996 in her home in boulder, colorado.
no one has been charged in the case although both alex hunter, boulder's district attorney, and mark beckner, boulder's police chief, have said that jonbenet's parents, john and patsy ramsey, fall under ``the umbrella of suspicion ''.
the ramseys' attorney, hal haddon, said that they do n't trust the boulder police.
on sept. 15, 1998 district attorney hunter took the case before a grand jury.
****
a boulder, colorado grand jury convened in sept 1998 to investigate the murder of jonbenet ramsey, 6, a beauty princess found beaten and strangled in her home dec 26, 1996.
no suspects have been named or arrests made but parents john and patsy ramsey are under suspicion.
they deny any involvement and claim police are biased against them.
boulder district attorney alex hunter brought the case before the grand jury.
he named experienced prosecutors bruce levin and mitch morrissey, from nearby counties, as special prosecutors to counteract claims of his bias towards the ramseys.
the ramseys have moved to atlanta.
****
john and patsy ramsey are the only suspects in the murder of their daughter, jonbenet, found dead in their home on december 26, 1996.
the boulder, colorado, district attorney questioned them in june 1998.
two special prosecutors began to present the case to a 12-member grand jury on september 15.
the grand jury met only 18 times over the next 10 weeks.
criticism abounded from claims of a rush to judgment to a pro-ramsay bias.
information was being leaked and both sides were using the press.
by january 9, 1999, the police were trying to identify a stuffed bear.
****
mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform-encephalopathy ( bse), started in britain in 1986.
it devastated beef industries; in canada $5 billion was lost in 2003-2004.
fear of bse produced embargoes; 3 dozen nations halted u.s. beef imports in 2003.
humans who have eaten infected beef can contract variant creutzfeldt-jaacob disease ( vcjd) which is fatal.
it has an incubation period of 10 years or more; today's patient could have eaten infected beef 10 years ago.
positive diagnosis is confirmed only by autopsy.
in britain, 147 are known dead of vcjd, another 10 elsewhere.
prevention is through testing and changes in cattle feed.
****
mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse) eats holes in the brains of cattle.
a human form of the disease, variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease ( vcjd), which can be caught from eating beef products from cattle with bse, causes personality change, loss of body functions, brain deterioration and death.
first identified in britain in 1996, there have been 147 cases there and 10 elsewhere.
widespread testing and destruction of cattle and bans on beef imports have been imposed in countries around the world including, britain, u.s., canada, eu, ireland, japan and taiwan.
****
mad cow disease ( bovine spongiform encephalopathy) appeared in britain in 1986.
it infected beef that had eaten feed containing animal brain and nervous tissue.
mad cow spread through europe and asia, with isolated cases found in north america.
people who ate contaminated beef products, especially nervous system tissue, or received a contaminated blood transfusion contracted the human variant, creutzfeldt-jakob.
after at least 10 years victims experience personality change, loss of body functions, brain deterioration, and death.
by 2004, 151 people had contracted the disease.
prevention includes killing herds, banning meat product in animal feed, testing older cattle, and halting imports,
****
creutzfeldt-jacob disease, the brain-wasting human form of mad cow disease ( mcd) believed to come from eating beef infected with the disease or from blood transfusions, has killed more than 150 people worldwide since discovered in britain in 1996.
most cases have occurred in britain, plus eight in france and two in ireland.
in an effort to control the spread of the disease, many countries have placed a ban on the import of beef, imposed tougher screening and slaughtering controls, and destroyed whole herds of cattle.
these measures have devastated the european, canadian, and u.s. cattle industries.
****
the term ``eating disorders ''can be subdivided into more specific categories.
in anorexia, sufferers become very thin while believing they are overweight.
in bulimia, affecting 7 million females and 1 million males, sufferers overeat.
another category, binge eating, is estimated to affect 2% of the population.
a drug, topiramate, has been devised to control this disorder, which like bulimia can lead to diabetes, heart disease, and cancer.
there is also a category designated ednos for eating disorder not otherwise specified.
examples of ednos include anorexics that do not menstruate, and individuals who purge after taking almost any amount of food.
****
eating disorders are a mental illness, difficult to treat since patients are in self-denial, with high morbidity and mortality ( 20% die).
they include anorexia ( self-starving), bulimia ( purging), binge-eating disorder, and variations.
between 1.5 to 11 million american women have or will have anexoria; more have bulimia.
historically affecting younger females and fewer males, trend data show changes.
permanent effects include weakened hearts, severe osteoporosis, brittle teeth and bones, and loss of stamina.
effective treatment is long term, usually not insured ( due to lack of specific diagnosis criteria), and includes psychiatric counseling and gentle persuasion by friends and family.
****
anorexia nervosa is a psychological disorder in which the sufferer starves his or her body to skin and bones but still wants to lose weight.
bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder in which the patient loses weight through forced vomiting after eating.
binge eating is a disorder that involves consuming much more than normal in a short period of time.
almost all who have this disorder are overweight or obese.
the insurance lobby has blocked attempts to have eating disorders added to the list of serious mental illnesses that insurance companies are mandated to cover.
****
about 8 million people suffer from eating-related psychiatric disorders; 20% die from it.
anorexics starve themselves, bulimics purge what they eat, purge-eaters purge but maintain weight, and binge-eaters just keep eating.
causes include depression, stress from life events, and a need to control some aspect in one's life.
anorexics and bulimics tend to be in denial.
they conceal their food-avoidance, which can lead to weakened hearts and osteoporosis.
binge-eating disorder results in overweight, with accompanying life-threatening ailments like hypertension and cancer.
an epilepsy medication, topiramate, may help curb the urge to overeat.
professional consultation and hospitalization programs may help.
****
flight 522 of the cypriot airline helios bound for athens from larnaka cyprus crashed at 12:05 p.m. august 14, 2005 near the coastal town of grammatikos killing all 121 aboard including 48 greek cypriot children and youths.
reports from greek air force pilots who intercepted the doomed airline suggest that a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure could have caused the crash.
cyprus transport minister haris thrasou said the plane had problems with decompression in the past.
the plane's black box has been recovered and the investigation of the cause of the crash is underway.
****
around 12:20 p.m. on august 14, helios airways flight 522, bound for athens from larnaca, cyprus, crashed near the greek town of grammatikos, killing all 121 onboard.
while the cause of the crash is unknown, terror attack has been ruled out.
the crew reported air conditioning system problems to cypriot officials, but failed to make radio contact with greek controllers.
greek fighter pilots, scrambled to intercept the unresponsive boeing 737, saw an unconscious pilot in the cockpit and oxygen masks dangling in the cabin, suggesting a catastrophic loss of air pressure.
helios denied reports of previous technical problems with that aircraft.
****
helios airways flight 522 crashed near athens shortly past noon on 14 august 2005, killing all 121 people aboard.
it is suspected a malfunction in the oxygen system caused a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure.
( there have been past reports of other oxygen-related problems on this airline).
however, experts are puzzled by the sudden incapacitation of first the crew and then the passengers.
usually, warning systems on a plane this size provide for a safe descent, but this plane continued on automatic pilot until it suddenly lost altitude and crashed.
the cypriot president announced three days of mourning.
****
on sunday, august 13, 2005 at 12:05pm, cyprus's helios airways flight 522 slammed into a greek hillside near grammatikos, 40 km north of athens.
all 121 aboard were killed, including 48 school children.
the crash ignited brush fires.
firefighters, rescue workers, and military helicopters sped to the scene.
black boxes were recovered.
boeing sent experts to investigate.
the probable cause was a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure that starved people of oxygen.
hypoxia from the cold caused them to pass out quickly.
two people tried unsuccessfully to gain control of the plane after the pilots collapsed.
oxygen masks had descended.
****
identity theft, assuming another person's identity, is the fastest growing crime in america.
most thefts involve acquiring social security and credit card numbers.
some thieves take pre-approved credit cards from mailboxes, others acquire corporate documents from dumpsters but the main avenue to theft is the computer.
hackers obtain information from automated medical records, credit records, bank records, property ownership records, and even driving records.
the entire gamut of society can be affected and such thievery is so widespread that support groups are arising for victims.
the victims' financial ruin and emotional distress has led to classifying identity theft a crime.
****
identity theft is the fastest growing crime in america with 350,000 people victimized yearly and $4 billion losses annually for businesses.
stealing an identity requires only a social security number and one other personal information item ( i.e.
mother?s maiden name) and takes victims years to recover.
computerized information and mailed credit cards contribute to increased identity theft.
solutions include shredding mail, guarding personal information, and checking credit reports annually.
the federal identity theft and assumption deterrence act of 1998 made identity theft a felony.
victims are frustrated with a criminal justice establishment that puts a low priority on prosecuting fraud.
****
``identity theft ''( it) is stealing someone's social security number, credit card numbers of other identifiers and using them to gain fraudulent credit.
it is one of the fastest growing crimes in the world.
it is estimated that up to 350,000 people are victimized by it each year.
the secret service estimates that it cost citizens $750 million in 1997 up from $450 million in 1996.
in october 1998 the president signed into law the identity theft and assumption deterrence act of 1998 making it a felony punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
****
identity theft is the fastest-growing crime, and one which evolves with each advance in technology.
banks and businesses lose up to an estimated $4 billion annually.
employee access to sensitive personal information increases the risk of identity theft.
individual victims spend countless dollars and hours over the course of months or years in their efforts to restore their good names and credit.
the new identity theft and assumption deterrence act of 1998 makes the crime a felony punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
on january 1, california became the ninth state to prosecute identity theft as a crime.
****
obesity is a major health problem since people who are overweight have increased tendencies toward cardiovascular and cerebral disease, diabetes and kidney and liver disease.
in china about 70 million are obese.
a survey in 1996 in shanghai found that 12.6% of adults and 11.35% of children are obese.
the incidence in britain is 16% of women and 13% of men; in kuwait, 42% of women and 28% of men.
the main causes of obesity are lack of regular exercise and poor diet.
kuwait, egypt, and lebanon have reported successful use of hypnotism in treating obesity.
****
obesity is on the increase in asian countries with rates of over 10% - equal and greater than that of developed countries.
causes are inactivity, poor diets, repeated pregnancies ( arab women), extra meals ( arab men), spoiling'only 'children ( chinese youth), fear, and anxiety.
obesity rates can vary by age, gender, and education levels.
the percentage increases as living standards rise, although the incidence is lower in better-educated people.
obesity leads to depression, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and other life-shortening ailments.
health departments around the world are advocating sensible diets and exercise.
hypnotherapy is being used successfully on obesity in several countries.
****
obesity is a big problem in 1996.
especially hard hit are kuwait ( about 50%), other arab nations, southern china, and to a lesser extent great britain.
obesity arises from bad diet, a sedentary life style, anxiety, many pregnancies, sleeping too much, and increases in income.
obesity can lead to hypertension and other cardio vascular diseases, depression, kidney and liver diseases, and vein hardening.
most dangerous is diabetes with complications of blindness, kidney failure, heart attacks, and amputations.
prevention of obesity lies with improved diets at home and school, education on nutrition, and exercise.
three arab nations are successful with hypnotism.
****
obesity shortens life.
it can lead to diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, cerebral diseases, and psychological problems.
the world health organization says that diabetes will more than double in the next 25 years, partly because of increasing obesity.
obesity is on the rise in the uk, china, and the middle east.
as living standards improve, people are less active and have access to a wider variety of foods, including foods high in fat and sugar such as fried foods, chips, sweets, soft drinks, and fast food.
kuwait, egypt, and lebanon have had great success in using hypnotism to combat obesity.
****
rain forests, those with heavy annual rainfall, and which contain valuable flora and fauna on the verge of extinction, exist not only in south and central america, but also in china and africa.
african countries are uniting to adopt protection policies.
china is establishing and expanding nature reserves, closing intrusive small companies and sugar factories, moving farms, arresting poachers, stopping illegal lumbering, and protecting gibbons, which have high research value.
a chinese scientist says protection of the rain forest means protecting an important gene.
malaysia is cooperating with brazil in the launch of satellites to monitor their tropical forests.
****
progress is underway in africa, asia and south america to protect tropical rain forest threatened by excessive cutting.
in china the government set up a tropical primary forest protective zone in hainan province in 1951.
in 1993 the hainan provincial government decided to stop commercial tree felling in the area.
yunnan province stopped building sugar factories in the xishuangbanna region to preserve tropical rain forest, removed itinerant farmers from the rain forest and settled them elsewhere, and have formed a team of armed patrolmen to discourage poaching and illegal lumbering.
****
tropical rain forests, such as those in china, malaysia, brazil, and several african nations, contain many rare species of flora and fauna.
threats to these forests include encroachment by farms and industrialization.
significant efforts are underway in china to enlarge and preserve these forests, including planting, prohibition or limitation on tree-cutting and factory building, relocation of farmers, and anti-poaching patrols.
malaysia has a joint satellite project with brazil to monitor rain forests and analyze the satellites' data.
austria is providing malaysian graduate students with scholarships in rain forest management.
african lumber producers included rainforest onservation as a timber conference topic.
****
to preserve rain forests in yunnan province, china stopped building sugar factories, resettled itinerant farmers, provided armed patrols, and nearly doubled its nature reserve size.
its first reserve was established in the 1950s.
hainan province stopped rain forest logging in 1993.
tropical rain forests, threatened with extinction, are important gene storehouses for rare flora and fauna, including black gibbons who resemble humans.
in africa, where dwindling rain forests threaten people's survival, timber interests and tanzania discussed rain forest protection.
austria offers scholarships for sustainable rain forest study in malaysia.
brazil and malaysia will jointly launch satellites to monitor tropical forests.
****
soeharto, former president of indonesia, is being investigated by that nation's legislative body, the indonesian attorney general ( ag) and his office, to determine whether his rumored wealth was gained illegally.
the investigation is in response to wide spread demands from students and opposition groups who contend soeharto, his family, and friends gained wealth through corruption.
estimates of soeharto's wealth range from $20 to $40 billion.
the investigation expanded to include present and former government officials and wealth stashed abroad.
soeharto obtained a lawyer who is a virtual unknown.
soeharto swore publicly that he did not have any deposits abroad.
****
on june 1, 1998 the indonesian attorney general announced an investigation into the wealth of former president soeharto and his family.
the indonesian data center reported soeharto family assets of about u.s. $17.5 billion.
on sept 21 it was announced that the government had set up two teams to investigate soeharto's corruption as well as his wealth.
on nov. 17 one of the teams announced that evidence of soeharto's ill-gotten wealth had been found including land, factories, and u.s. $2.3 million in personal savings accounts.
on nov. 19 an anti-soeharto mass demonstration took place in indonesia's capital of jakarta.
****
indonesian former president soeharto's wealth, once estimated to be billions of u.s. dollars, is under investigation by indonesian legislators.
in november 1998, following months of demands for an inquiry and statements from the government suggesting one was going on, the investigation became part of a general decree calling for the removal of all traces of corruption, collusion, and nepotism amongst current and former officials, their families and cronies, and businesspersons.
the government prosecutor's office is pursuing soeharto's allegedly ill-gotten wealth, spread out around the country and overseas.
soeharto has hired several non-government lawyers because he is a private citizen now.
****
in response to mounting demands from students and opposition groups, the wealth accumulated by indonesia's former president soeharto, his family, and his friends is under investigation.
on 13 november the indonesian assembly issued a decree on clean government that condemned corruption, collusion, and nepotism and specified that soeharto?s wealth be investigated.
the attorney general has set up two investigative teams and promised to search for assets overseas.
soeharto has denied publicly that he amassed a fortune worth billions of us dollars during his 32-year rule.
conflicting reports indicate that he has hired foreign lawyers or an unknown local lawyer.
****
between 10 and 13 september 1999, a storm named floyd proceeded from northwest of barbuda towards miami, moving at speeds up to 14 mph, with winds progressing from 110 mph to 155 mph, thus upgrading it to a major hurricane.
warnings extended along the atlantic coast from south florida to the barrier islands of south georgia.
florida governor bush declared an emergency, hundreds of thousands, particularly mobile homers, moving inland.
cape kennedy workers were sent home.
fema stood ready with ice, potable water, generators, tents, and food, as well as having contractors ready for debris removal and roof repair.
****
in early september, 1999, authorities worried about the growth of hurricane floyd as they tracked its movements from the atlantic toward the u.s. coast.
emergency management officials in florida began mobilizing and the governor declared a state of emergency.
on september 13, mandatory evacuations were ordered in brevard county florida, and coastal georgia; hundreds of thousands fled their homes.
experts speculated floyd could become a catastrophic category 5 hurricane, with winds over 156 miles per hour, the first such storm to hit the coast.
individuals were urged to make homes as hurricane proof as possible.
****
on september 11, tropical storm floyd became the fourth atlantic hurricane of the year, moving through the north atlantic toward the eastern us.
moving away from the caribbean's leeward islands toward florida, category 4 hurricane floyd, with 131 mph winds that reached 155 mph around the eye, extended 700 miles in all directions.
in florida, emergency management officials mobilized and the governor declared a state of emergency.
mandatory evacuations were ordered in florida and georgia, and cruise ships and pleasure craft left for safer waters.
fema emergency response centers positioned ice, water, cots, tents and emergency food and medical supplies.
****
floyd became a hurricane on september 10, 1999.
it was north of puerto rico and the virgin islands.
by september 13, floyd had become a category 4, monster storm, expected to hit the east coast between miami and brunswick, georgia, by september 15.
if the winds increase it would be only the third category 5 storm to hit the u.s. fema has opened response centers, formed a liaison team, and pre-positioned supplies in atlanta.
florida has declared a state of emergency and is mobilizing.
kennedy space center is being evacuated.
citizens are urged to prepare and consider voluntary evacuations.
****
in aruba, natalee holloway vanished early may 30, leaving behind luggage packed for her trip home.
the kaploe brothers and joran andreas petrus van der sloot, son of a judicial official, were questioned by police, released, but taken into custody june 9 under suspicion of murder/kidnapping but with no formal charges.
all three say they are innocent.
attorney general janssen and police supt.
straaten lead investigations and are taciturn.
the holloway family, without police assistance, identified and located the three men in custody less than 24 hours after natallee went missing.
they criticize the investigation.
aruba residents criticize media attention.
****
natalee holloway, an 18-year-old high school graduate from alabama, missing since early may 30, 2005 was last seen leaving an oranjestad night club on aruba.
four suspects are being held: joran van der sloot, 17, brothers deepak, 21, and satish kalpoe, 18, from suriname, and steve gregory croes, 26, a disc jockey.
extensive searches uncovered no evidence.
van der sloot and the kalpoe brothers claimed they left holloway at her hotel.
another source quoted deepak kalpoe saying he and his brother dropped off holloway and van der sloot at another hotel.
no one has been charged.
****
dutch 17-year-old, joran van der sloot, is one of three suspects in the may 30 disappearance of american 18-year-old natalee holloway, on vacation in aruba.
the three were with her the night she vanished.
natalee's relatives flew immediately to aruba.
they, not police, identified and located joran.
within 24 hours of her disappearance, they questioned him with police present.
he was not arrested until 10 days later.
police searched the van der sloot home and vehicles almost another week later.
his father, a judge-in-training in aruba, was questioned on june 18.
joran remains in custody for at least another week.
****
american natalee holloway, 18, disappeared in aruba on may 30, 2005.
she was last seen with a dutch citizen, joran van der sloot, and surinamese brothers, satish and deepak kaploe.
police picked these men up on june 9 and arrested them on june 16.
the next day a tour boat disc jockey was also arrested.
two security guards were also picked up but later released.
the investigation is being conducted by aruba police, forensic investigators, and the district attorney.
natalee's relatives had first identified the suspects.
the search for natalee continued through june 19 and no charges have been issued.
****
on april 23, 2000 six masked assailants armed with rocket launchers and m16 rifles abducted 20 people from a beach on sipadan island off the coast of sabah, the malaysian side of borneo island.
ten of the captives are foreign tourists and ten malaysians from the resort area popular with scuba divers.
the gunmen forced their hostages to swim to two fishing boats which sped away toward philippine waters.
a philippine muslim separatist group, abu sayyaf, claimed responsibility for the abductions, but neither this claim nor location of the 20 captives has been confirmed.
****
on april 24, six armed assailants abducted from the malaysian resort island sipadan 21 people, including germans, french, south africans, finns, lebanese, philippine and malaysians.
an american couple escaped.
the philippine muslim rebel group abu sayyaf, who demanded the release of arab terrorists held in us prisons, claimed responsibility, although authorities were skeptical.
malaysian and philippine police and military were searching by air and sea.
an intelligence report claimed the hostages were taken by boat to the province of sulu at the southern tip of the philippines.
five people were being questioned, including former employees of the resort.
****
on sunday night, april 23, 2000, six masked filipinos armed with m16s and rocket launchers took 21 people hostage on a beach on sipadan island.
sipadan is a diving resort off the northeast coast of sabah, the malaysian side of borneo.
an american couple escaped.
the hostages include local staff, a policeman, 10 american and european tourists, and two south africans.
two boats carrying hostages headed toward philippine waters early monday morning.
the motive remains unconfirmed.
the philippine rebel group abu sayyaf claims responsibility but authorities are skeptical.
authorities pursued the pirates and know where the hostages are being held.
****
twenty people were taken hostage by six heavily armed assailants on a remote resort island in eastern malaysia late sunday 23 april.
they were taken in two boats headed for the philippines.
the hostages consisted of ten foreign tourists - three germans, two french, two south africans, two finns, and one lebanese - 9 malaysians including a policeman, and one filipino.
two americans escaped.
the assailants, carrying ak-47s and a rocket launcher, claimed to be members of a small radical muslim group fighting for an independent state in the philippines.
malaysian and philippine police are both involved in the search.
****
americans were troubled by food recalls the winter of 98-99.
in october, heinz recalled lead tainted baby food but no deaths were reported.
in november, ibf recalled beef possibly containing e-coli, which causes kidney failure and anemia.
in december, sara lee recalled deli meats after an outbreak of food poisoning, which killed 4 people, the at-risk population the elderly and pregnant women.
in january, thorn apple valley recalled meat products due to the possibility of listeria, which causes flu-like symptoms, especially threatening pregnant women.
possible listeria also saw oscar mayer recall deli meat in january.
****
according to the fda, between 1988 and 1998 there was a fivefold increase in food products recalled for e.coli and listeria bacteria and other life-threatening contaminants.
listeria was suspected or found in meat products of several companies, and one company's hot dogs were blamed for sickening 70 and killing 16.
in a normal year listeria is estimated to cause 1,850 illnesses resulting in 425 deaths.
the agriculture department urged consumers to return all recalled products and to properly handle, cook, and store food.
it was considering requirements for more industry testing.
the president proposed giving increased authority to food agencies.
****
from october 1998 to february, food produced in the united states was tainted with listeria, e. coli, enterotoxigenic e. coli, and lead, causing recalls of products.
listeria caused nine recalls of meat with one producer causing 82 illnesses and 12 adult deaths.
one recall for e. coli and one recall of baby food containing lead resulted in no illnesses.
in july 1998 president clinton asked for more money and authority for the food and drug administration, to facilitate faster recalls, warning labels, and a food safety research institute.
rigid food safety practices are the best way to avoid infection.
****
there has been a sudden increase in u.s. food recalls because of centralized food processing and wide distribution.
tainted foods present a major health threat to the elderly, pregnant women, the very young, and those with weakened immune systems.
the bacteria are found in hot dogs, cold cuts, and soft cheeses.
in response to an outbreak of food poisoning, the government and/or company can recall the products and stop production operations, but the consumer must check product codes, cook meats to 165 degrees, separate raw foods and uncooked meats, and wash hands and cutting tools thoroughly.
****
debra lafave, a newly married 24-year old tampa area teacher arrested in june 2004 was charged with lewd and lascivious battery, involving four encounters in two different counties with a 14-year old student, evidence including photos and tapes.
defense attorney john fitzgibbons offered a plea of not guilty by insanity, bipolar disorder, but media attention caused the boy's mother to accept an agreement with judge wayne timmerman of hillsborough county for penalties but no imprisonment.
judge hale stancil in marion county refused agreement in december 2005.
ric ridgeway of the state attorney's office said new plea deal would be proposed.
****
for 18 months, media fed the public details about attractive debra lafave, former tampa florida middle school teacher, and her student lover, a 14-year old boy.
her guilt of lewd conduct with a minor in hillsborough county was admitted before trial.
at issue was sentencing.
november 21, prosecutor and defense agreed on a plea deal allowing her to avoid prison.
the prosecutor said media attention made the boy's family want to end the process.
defense attorney said media coverage was the most critical factor of the entire case.
objections by a marion county judge may change the plea deal.
****
on november 22, middle school teacher debra lafave pleaded guilty to lewd acts with her 14-year-old student, in exchange for three years house arrest and seven years probation, thereby avoiding possibly 30 years in prison.
the victim's family agreed to the deal to save their son from a media frenzy at trial, where lafave would plead not guilty by reason of insanity.
her lawyer rejected an earlier offer of three years in prison, arguing that she was too beautiful to survive in prison.
however, a hitch developed when a judge balked, wanting more information and changes to the plea.
****
former hillsborough county teacher deborah lafave pled guilty to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery in exchange for three years of house arrest and seven years' probation.
accused of having sex with a 14-year-old boy, she would have faced up to 30 years in prison if convicted.
their son's emotional health was cited by the youth's parents when they agreed to lafave's plea deal instead of a trial.
however, the judge in neighboring marion county, where one of the encounters took place, wants more information on a trial's impact on the two youth involved, thus reopening the investigation.
****
australia strongly opposes japan's plan to increase its authorized kill of whales in antarctic waters at the annual meeting of the international whaling commission opening may 30, 2005 in south korea.
australian attorney general philip ruddock says australia would lead a diplomatic effort to have a south pacific whale sanctuary, but would not try to board japanese ships.
prime minister john howard said australia was working with the united states, new zealand and england to convince japan to reconsider its proposal.
japan is believed to have the votes to get its proposal approved.
****
japan plans to seek permission to expand its so-called research whaling program when the international whaling commission ( iwc) meets in late may, intending to nearly double its annual catch of minke whales and to hunt endangered humpback and fin whales.
australia, new zealand, and conservationists strongly oppose japan's plan to expand whaling in the australia-declared whale sanctuary in antarctic waters, but they have no legal recourse to stop it.
australia's prime minister appealed directly to his japanese counterpart, urging him to reconsider his position.
he dispatched lobbying missions to europe and the pacific to rally iwc votes against japan's plans.
****
japan wants to nearly double its annual antarctic catch of 440 minke whales and catch 80 each of endangered humpback and fin whales.
it will seek approval at the 2005 international whaling commission meeting.
pro-whaling countries may have a voting majority for the first time since 1986, when the iwc halted commercial whaling.
in 1987 japan resumed under a research-whaling loophole.
its 2000-ton catch brings in $52 million.
australia opposes whaling in its antarctic whale sanctuary.
whale-watching is a major tourist industry for new zealand and australia.
australia forbade a suit against the japanese whaling company, preferring a diplomatic solution.
****
australia and new zealand are strongly opposed to japan's plans to seek approval at the international whaling commission ( iwc) to enlarge its catch of whales in antarctica.
japan wants to almost double its catch of minke whales and add humpback and fin whales, both of which are endangered.
there is a moratorium on commercial whaling, but japan hunts them under a loophole that allows ``research whaling ''.
it does not recognize australia's claim of sovereignty over australian antarctic territory.
whaling opponents fear that pro-whaling countries like japan and norway could get a majority vote at the iwc.
****
in central europe, the worst snowfall in 50 years triggered february avalanches that hit ski resorts and towns in austria's western states of triol and vorarlberg, blocking roads and stranding tens of thousands.
the galtuer resort, near the swiss border, was hit by two consecutive avalanches on february 22 and 23, and early reports said at least 16 were dead, 30 injured and 29 missing.
avalanche deaths and injuries were also reported in valzur and ischgl.
austria established a center in landeck for sending supplies and receiving victims by helicopter.
avalanches have killed 60 this year throughout europe.
****
in february 1999, austria suffered its worst avalanches in 45 years because of almost unparalleled amounts of snow and high winds whipping it into drifts and making it unstable on the crust of earlier snow.
in the ski resort of galtuer near the swiss border, 16 were confirmed killed and 20-30 were missing from two avalanches on consecutive days.
the first avalanche was 15-20 feet high and 300-500 feet wide; the second was 45 feet high.
in other avalanches, in nearby ischgl, one woman was killed and six others were missing, and in valzur two were killed.
****
avalanches on 23 and 24 february 1999 struck an austrian ski region, including villages of galtuer, valzur, gargellen, and ischgl.
at least 25 people were killed with dozens missing.
houses and cars were crushed by snow walls as large as 45 'deep and 600 wide.
thousands of tourists were stranded.
at first snow and wind limited all but local rescue attempts.
by the second day 200 army troops were helping, and a dozen helicopters transported injured to a hospital in landeck, where rescue headquarters was located.
these avalanches were set off by the fiercest alpine snowstorms in 50 years.
****
the worst snow storm in 50 years and high winds are causing avalanches in austria.
the galtuer ski resort area was hit by avalanches on february 23 and 24, 1999.
ten houses were crushed, 16 people dead, 17 injured, and 15 missing.
initial rescue operations were by locals then austrian troops and helicopters were brought in.
the united states, germany and switzerland offered additional helicopters.
an emergency command post was established to take victims and send food and supplies.
also on february 24, an avalanche struck valzur, killing two.
on february 22, an avalanche buried two, one dying, in gargallen.
****
on august 20, 1998 six u.s. tomahawk missiles struck a factory in khartoum sudan.
ten people were injured, 4 critically.
the attack was in retaliation for the aug. 7 bombing of u.s. embassies in nairobi and dar es-salaam.
american authorities claimed that the factory produced precursors for the deadly vx chemical weapon and was associated with osama bin laden.
sudanese insisted it was actually a pharmaceutical factory with no bin laden connection.
sudan's u.n. ambassador, elfatih mohamed ahmed erwa said he would file a formal complaint with the security council president, danilo turk on aug. 21.
****
on 20 august 1998 u.s. missiles hit a khartoum factory, avenging the 7 august bombings of u.s. embassies in nairobi and dar-es-salaam which killed over 250.
the clinton administration claimed the building produced chemical weapons agents; sudan asserted it was a pharmaceutical factory.
casualties include 10 injured and several missing.
clinton accused sudan of supporting osama bin laden's terrorist activities, including bombing the embassies and hosting terrorist camps as well as financing the factory.
( simultaneous u.s. strikes hit bin laden camps in afghanistan).
sudan asked the u.n. for an investigation, as anti-u.s. demonstrations erupted all over the middle east.
****
in august 1998, the u.s. attacked el-shifa pharmaceutical factory in khartoum, sudan with tomahawk cruise missiles, causing $100 million damage.
the u.s. claimed the factory made precursors for vx chemical weapons and was tied to osama bin laden, blamed for u.s. embassy bombings in kenya and tanzania ten people were injured, four critically.
locals were shocked the u.s. struck a city factory and doubted it made weapons.
demonstrators stormed the empty u.s. embassy compound.
u.s. opponents said clinton ordered the attack to distract attention from his monica lewinsky troubles.
sudan recalled its diplomats from washington and complained to the un.
****
thursday 20 august the u.s. bombed a factory in khartoum, wreaking heavy damage and injuring 10 people, 4 of them critically.
more casualties may lie under the rubble.
the u.s. said the attack was in retaliation for the bombings of u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania three days earlier and claimed that the factory was producing chemical weapon agents and was linked to osama bin laden.
sudan maintained that it was a pharmaceutical factory and asserted that the attack was intended to divert attention from the monica lewinsky scandal.
khartoum staged anti-u.s. demonstrations friday.
****
in 1975. shortly after passage of the 1973 endangered species act, grizzly bears in yellowstone and grand teton parks and some adjacent lands were listed as endangered, necessitating protection efforts in the interest of biodiversity.
the listing succeeded with numbers increasing from around 200 in 1982 to near 600 in 2005.
this success led the u.s.
fish and wildlife service to propose delisting some parts of the protected area.
the national resources council, the sierra club, and other groups opposed delisting, citing the encroachment of housing developments and diminished food supply.
a decision about delisting was due mid-february 2006.
****
in 2005, after 30 years on the endangered species list, the us fish and wildlife service was preparing to delist yellowstone's grizzly bear contingent, whose numbers have increased from about 200 to 600.
however, protection would continue in 6,000 square miles of the bears' core habitat in the park and adjacent federal lands and they would continue to be monitored by federal scientists.
responsibility for managing the grizzlies outside of yellowstone and grand teton parks would be turned over to montana, idaho, and wyoming officials, who could allow limited hunting.
environmental groups disagreed over whether the bears remained at risk.
****
the yellowstone grizzly bear, a revered symbol of the american west, has been threatened by competition for food, low birthrates, and hunting as well as loss of habitat from industry, recreation, and development.
a population under 500 can lose genetic diversity and be vulnerable to disease and birth defects.
besides putting them on the endangered species list in 1975, measures to protect them included hunting bans, road closures and fences, relocation, and garbage removal.
this brought the grizzly to a population of over 600 and possible removal from the list.
conservation groups are divided over the latter possibility.
****
the us fish and wildlife service may remove yellowstone grizzly bears from the endangered species list.
the population has made a significant recovery, tripling since 1983, but the grizzlies reproduce very slowly and some of their food sources are threatened.
this would open privately owned lands in the area, about one-third of the current habitat, to logging, recreation, and development.
the responsibility for managing the bears would be turned over to three nearby states, wyoming, montana, and idaho.
the national wildlife foundation supports the move; the sierra club, natural resources defense council, and other powerful environmental organizations oppose it.
****
head injuries such as concussions can be prevented or minimized by wearing helmets or other headgear.
in some jurisdictions motorcyclists are required to wear helmets.
in sports cyclists and football players can reduce their risk by wearing helmets; hockey players by wearing masks; basketball and tennis players by wearing eye guards; and baseball players by using batting helmets.
in new york state law requires bicycle riders, in-line skaters and skateboarders under 14 to wear helmets.
a san diego-based firm has produced a headgear for soccer where the incidence of concussions is high.
****
the use of safety helmets is being promoted to prevent head injuries amongst motor- and bicyclists, as well as players in team and individual sports.
helmets can reduce fatalities and serious brain injuries, and may prevent concussions, although in some cases there is insufficient evidence.
countermeasures include cyclists' helmets' being mandatory in argentina and uganda, strongly advised in the asean nations, and recommended for australian cowboys and mounted sheepherders.
new york is the 7th state to require helmets for skateboarders; cyclists and inline skaters already covered by law.
many schools and clubs are now using special headgear for soccer players.
****
protective helmets can reduce head injuries in bicyclists and motorcyclists and are often required by law.
new traffic laws in argentina and uganda require motorcycle helmets.
many sports-related concussions go undiagnosed.
injured return to play and risk further damage.
few coaches are trained.
helmets can protect baseball batters, skateboarders and in-line skaters and are required in some states.
soccer helmets are controversial although concussions occur in soccer at a rate ( 60-70 percent) similar to football.
most epilepsy head injuries are minor bruises.
in australia, a protective hat for cowboys on horseback is under development but stockmen insist it look good.
****
concussions are a common head injury.
most are sports related or involve motorcycle or bicycle riders.
concussion symptoms are experienced by 70.4% of football players and 62.7% of soccer players each year and more than one half are never diagnosed.
serious concussions are brain damaging.
also, people may fall during epileptic seizures.
laws mandating the use of seatbelts and cyclist helmets should be enforced.
helmets are required for participants in baseball, football, equestrian events, in-line skating, and hockey.
masks should be added to hockey helmets.
skateboarders, soccer players, and cowboys use helmets rarely.
coaches should take safety courses.
****
trials are scheduled in laramie, wyoming for russell henderson and aaron mckinney, charged with first degree murder, kidnapping, and aggravated robbery in the october 1998 death of matthew shepard, who was gay.
henderson's trial is scheduled for april 6, mckinney's for august 9.
both face the death penalty if convicted.
henderson and mckinney, posing as homosexuals, kidnapped shepard, pistol whipped him, stole $20, and left him tied to a fence.
shepard died five days later in hospital.
jury selection started march 24 for henderson.
the crime drew national condemnation and calls for stronger bias crime laws.
****
russell henderson and aaron mckinney, both 21, are charged with murder for the october 6, 1998 beating death of university student matthew shepard in laramie, wyoming.
both face the death penalty if convicted.
jury selection for henderson's trial, rescheduled from march 22 to april 6, began march 24.
the defense will argue that henderson was more a witness, rather than perpetrator of the crime, attempting to shift the blame to his co-defendant.
police say the crime was motivated in part because shepard was gay.
the brutal killing prompted gay rights activists and shepard's mother to lobby for stronger hate-crime laws.
****
russell henderson and aaron mckinney are charged with 1st-degree murder in the death of matthew shepard, near laramie, in october 1998.
they are also accused of kidnapping, beating, and robbing shepard, before leaving him tied outdoors in freezing weather.
( he died in hospital).
henderson's trial comes first, the prosecutor being cal rerucha.
the defense lawyer claims henderson was merely a witness to mckinney's crimes.
he also said the crime was not pre-meditated.
authorities state the motivation was partly because shepard was gay, and they had posed as homosexuals to lure him.
if convicted, both men could face the death penalty.
****
matthew shepard, a gay college student in laramie, wyoming, was kidnapped, pistol whipped, robbed, and left for dead in october 1998.
he died 5 days later.
russel henderson and aaron mckinney are charged with 1st degree murder, kidnapping, and aggravated theft and face the death penalty.
mckinney's trial is set for august 9.
the jury selection for the henderson trial began on march 24, with opening arguments to begin april 6 with a five-week trial.
the judge is jeffrey donnell, prosecutor cal rerucha, and defense attorney wyatt skaggs.
twenty-nine of 71 potential jurors were dismissed during the first two days.
****
the federal trial of unabomber suspect theodore kaczynski began with jury selection in sacramento on 12 november 1997.
turned in by mother and brother, the former math instructor was arrested in april 1996, suspected of terrorizing the country in a campaign against technology between 1978-1995, mailing bombs which killed three people and injured twenty-three.
federal defense attorneys, quinn denvir and judy clark, entered a plea of innocent, seeking a separate new jersey trial incorporated into the sacramento trial.
attorney general janet reno approved seeking the death penalty.
u.s. district judge burrell allowed kaczynski's journals to be used as evidence.
****
in sacramento, theodore kaczynski faces a 10-count federal indictment for 4 of the 16 mail bomb attacks attributed to the unabomber in which two people were killed.
if found guilty, he faces a death penalty.
kaaczynski also faces new jersey charges for another fatal bombing.
he has pleaded innocent to all charges.
u.s. district judge garland burrell jr. presides in sacramento.
the trial may take 6 months.
attorneys made opening statements in january 1998.
in new jersey, judge debevoisse heard defense arguments for combining all charges at a single sacramento trial.
kaczynski's defense attorneys are quin denvir and judy clarke.
****
the so-called unabomber, 54-year-old former mathematics professor theodore kaczynski, accused of killing three and injuring 23 during a campaign against technology between 1978 and 1995, is awaiting trial in sacramento, california.
jury selection is scheduled to begin november 12, 1997, and the trial is expected to last six months.
in april 1996, kaczynski was arrested by the fbi at his remote cabin in montana after being turned in by his brother david.
authorities had been searching unsuccessfully for him for 18 years.
kaczynski intends to plead innocent at trial, and prosecutors are unsure if they will seek the death penalty.
****
theodore kaczynski is suspected of being the unabomber, the mail-bomb terrorist who killed three and injured 23 others in 16 bombings over an 18-year period.
kaczynski is charged with four of the unabomber's 16 attacks, including two fatalities in california.
he is also charged with a fatal bombing in new jersey.
he has pled innocent in the first trial, which will be held in sacremento and address the california deaths.
prosecutors say they have a lot of evidence, including kaczynski's incriminating diaries, which defense lawyers quin denvir and judy clarke tried unsuccessfully to have excluded from the trial.
****
yearlong uneasiness in baluchistan erupted on 17 march 2005, a six vehicle convoy attacked by bugti tribal rebels.
the death toll in the town of dera bugti in the southwest pakistan province was eight soldiers with seven wounded, and twenty-two tribesmen killed and seventy wounded.
seventeen hindus also died and their temple damaged.
the frontier corps then sent troops and two helicopters to quell the uprising.
the goal of the rebels was greater autonomy and increased benefits from the region's resources.
three thousand government civilians then fled the area, the same number of bugti women and children also fleeing.
****
on march 17, 2005 thirty people were killed and more than 70 wounded in fierce gun battles between pakistani soldiers and bugti tribesmen in the southwestern province of baluchistan.
the exchange of rockets and mortar shells continued all day after the rebels ambushed a pakistani convoy in the tribal stronghold of dera bugti.
a senior official there reported about 5000 armed tribesmen positioned in mountains outside the town where both sides are evacuating residents.
baluchistan has for more than a year experienced attacks by tribesmen demanding more revenue in compensation for natural resources extracted from their territory.
****
in baluchistan on thursday, march 17, 2005, in an escalation of violence after a january 2nd rape, bugti tribesmen attacked a pakistani frontier corps convoy and shelled a military base.
a cease-fire ended day-long fighting in dera bugti.
up to 45 died.
others died from bombs on trains ( placed by the baluchistan liberation army), in turbat and quetta, and 39 at a fatahpur shrine.
nawab akbar bugti warned dera bugti residents to leave and 3000 did.
1500-5000 tribesmen gathered in nearby mountains waiting to attack government installations and troops.
tribesmen want more autonomy and increased benefits from baluchistan's natural resources.
****
rebellion has increased dramatically in baluchistan, where tribesmen demand greater royalties from gas reserves and object to the army's establishing new garrisons.
rebels attacked a paramilitary convoy and a base near dera bugti on 17 march, killing up to 30 people and injuring more than 70.
two trains were bombed killing 2 and injuring 8, a bomb killed 39 at the memorial of a muslim sufi saint, and 17 minority hindus were killed when their temple was hit by rockets thousands of government employees and their families, and thousands of women and children of local tribesmen, fled their homes.
****
ephedra, also called ma huang, is an herbal stimulant containing the chemical ephedrine.
it is an ingredient in a variety of weight-loss, energy-boosting, and body building supplements.
it can be dangerous to people with certain underlying health problems.
side effects include anxiety, insomnia, hypertension, tachycardia, psychosis, kidney damage, dependency, heart attack, and stroke.
it is linked to over 12 deaths worldwide.
ephedra can produce an amphetamine-like rush, and is used to make methamphetamine.
having received hundreds of complaints about ephedra, the fda has issued warnings and is considering establishing limits on its use.
several states have banned ephedrine-containing supplements.
****
the asian herb ephedra contains stimulants known chemically as ephedrine.
pure ephedrine can be used to make methamphedamine, a highly addictive street drug, but in controlled dosages it is prescribed for colds and asthma.
as an herbal dietary supplement, outside fda control, it can decrease appetite, improve concentration, raise metabolism, and enhance sexual performance.
but it can be habit-forming; reports of deaths and other negative side effects ( including anxiety, insomnia, hypertension, psychosis, kidney damage, heart attack, and stroke) have led to the rare case where the government takes action against an herbal product, considering regulations on sales, labeling, and dosage.
****
ephedra ( ephedrine) is the herb ma huang used in chinese medicine.
it appears in many weight-loss, energy-boosting, and body-building supplements.
ephedra stimulates the central nervous system and heart.
people think natural means good but ephedra can harm people with hypertension.
hundreds of adverse reactions have been reported, including 40 deaths.
classed as a dietary supplement, ephedra is not subject to regulation.
industry lobbyists protecting highly popular and profitable products defeated the fda's 1997 efforts to set dosage standards.
the ftc took action claiming false advertising.
china tightened controls on production.
college and olympic authorities and several states banned ephedrine-containing supplements.
****
ephedra, a diet supplement and herb containing ephedrine, is a heart stimulant that may cause physical and mental problems, and death.
producers claim it increases energy, helps take off weight, tones muscles, and increases sexual sensation.
millions of people, especially athletes, are taking this supplement.
its unsupervised sale was made possible by 1994 legislation which removed food and drug administration ( fda) oversight of diet products.
the deaths of 40 and incidents involving 800 have caused the fda to try to limit supplements to 8 mgs per dose, 24 mgs per day.
chinese and texas authorities are also concerned.
****
the recent 26 december 2004 tsunami in the indian ocean with destruction of mangrove forests has highlighted their environmental importance.
the trees grow in swampy coastal areas, providing buffers against tsunami caused erosion, providing nurseries for many fish species, providing wood for fuel, boats, and homes, also providing sanctuaries for shorebirds and crab eating monkeys.
vietnam, india, and indonesia have long recognized their benefits and have ongoing programs for their protection.
a u.n. agriculture agency pushed for early rehabilitation of mangroves damaged by the tsunami, but warned against overforestation to the detriment of other ecosystems.
****
mangrove forests thrive near the mouths of large river deltas.
their roots collect sediment and slow the water's flow, protecting the coastline, preventing erosion, and gradually extending the coastline seaward.
mangroves also give inhabitants timber, fuel wood and thatch for houses.
up to half of the world's mangrove swamps have disappeared in the last 20-30 years because of the development of tourist resorts and shrimp farms.
the asian tsunami of dec. 26, 2004 gave many examples of shore areas saved by mangroves and of lives and structures destroyed where mangroves had earlier been removed.
****
mangrove forests create nurseries for many fish and provide habitat for birds, monkeys, fishing cats, and crustaceans.
they provide construction and fuel materials for humans.
mangrove roots collect sediment and prevent erosion.
in the 2004 indian ocean tsunami, mangroves lessened onshore damage and their absence exacerbated it.
the tsunami uprooted mangrove forests from sri lanka to thailand and damaged their ecosystems.
eased regulations allowing development of tourist, transportation, and aquaculture facilities have caused half the world's mangrove swamps to disappear in the last 30 years.
authorities are studying mangrove-forest rehabilitation and introduction.
idled fishermen are planting mangroves in tamil nadu.
****
mangroves grow in thickets along tropical coastlines with tangled roots above ground and salt-filtering taproots.
acting as shock absorbers, they are vital in protecting the shore.
they teem with life, providing a safe haven for fish, birds, crustaceans, and shellfish.
up to half of the world's mangroves have disappeared in the last 20-30 years because of the development of tourist resorts and commercial prawn farming.
there are now fewer than 40,000 acres left.
the un has called for the rehabilitation of mangroves damaged by the recent tsunami, noting that there was much less damage in mangrove-protected areas.
****
on november 28, escaping natural gas posed risk of explosion on an oil-drilling platform in the north sea.
most workers were evacuated and oil production halted.
operated by statoil, norway's state-controlled oil company, this platform also processes oil from nearby vigdis field.
statoil thought production could resume in a month but norway's petroleum safety authority has approval authority and said that damage may be greater than first believed.
a month-and-a-half after the closing, statoil asked to partially resume production though it would take time to reach even limited production goals.
statoil is losing $1.8 million daily.
****
a november 2004 natural gas leak on norwegian statoil's snorre a oil platform in the north sea caused the shutdown of production from snorre a and neighboring platform vigdis, resulting in a cut in oil output of 205,000 barrels a day for norway and costing statoil 1.4 million euros daily.
the leak, which could have caused a catastrophic explosion, was contained 18 hours after it was reported.
there was no evidence of oil leaked into the water, and there were no injuries.
statoil's request to restart operations would not be granted until an inspection by the norwegian petroleum safety authority.
****
a gas leak in an injection shaft shut down norway's snorre a oil platform in the north sea nw of bergen around 7pm november 28, 2004.
because of explosion risk, 180 workers were evacuated.
operator statoil pumped in drilling mud to push back gas and seal the leak with cement, in constant contact with technical experts.
snorre a and neighboring vigdis were shut down for over a month, costing 205,000 barrels of oil daily.
an oversight agency needed to approve resumption but rough weather delayed inspections.
a gas leak that shut down marathon's brae alpha platform november 27th appeared unrelated.
****
on november 28, 2004 norway's statoil closed the snorra and vigdis oil platforms in the north sea.
a gas leak caused the snorra to become unstable and it could explode.
the leak was contained then statoil began pumping drilling mud into the injection well.
this closure dropped norway's production by 205,000 barrels per day, costing statoil $1.8 million a day.
statoil hoped to resume operations by december 31, but bad weather and safety authority approval delayed plans.
statoil requested approval on january 13.
another north sea leak caused marathon oil corp to close the brae alpha platform on november 30.
****
on july 25, 2005 south korean president roh moo-hyun called for a ``thorough ''investigation by the national intelligence service ( nis) into allegations that intelligence officials had, in 1997, illegally taped conversations between hong seok-hyun, south korean ambassador to the u.s. and lee hak-soo, a high ranking official of samsung, the country's largest business conglomerate.
revelation of the recorded conversations involving an illegal political slush fund caused hong to resign as ambassador.
on august 5 nis released interim results from its ongoing investigation admitting it had taped influential figures as late as 2002, but not under president roh's administration.
****
the south korean president initiated an investigation of illegal wire-tapping by nis ( the intelligence service).
this produced 274 illegal recordings, and led to the arrests of a retired nis official, who had kept an illegal tape, and the businessman to whom he gave it, who then leaked it to the media.
it resulted in the resignation of the ambassador to the u.s., heard on the tape in an incriminating conversation with a samsung executive, discussing allegedly illegal political contributions.
samsung apologized and filed a libel suit.
nis' current chief admitted his agency's earlier bugging operations.
the media are being questioned.
****
in 2005 south korean president roh moo-hyun called for a probe into illegal wiretapping by the national intelligence service after a 1997 recording was leaked to the media.
kong un-yong, former nis special wiretapping unit head, attempted suicide after the announcement.
he left a note saying he kept recordings at home after retirement and gave the tape to a korean-american businessman, who leaked copies after his blackmail attempt failed.
the businessman was arrested.
nis director kim seung-gyu publicly apologized for the wiretapping, which continued until 2002, long after it was ordered ended in 1998.
he said the nis would reform.
****
in late july south korean tv and newspapers released illegally taped private conversations between a major newspaper publisher and a samsung executive, in which they discussed samsung's providing a $3 million slush fund for candidates in the 1997 elections.
nis apologized for illegal wiretapping, which continued until march 2002.
samsung apologized for the scandal.
the newspaper publisher, hong, appointed ambassador to the us in february, resigned.
a former intelligence official was arrested after trying to commit suicide.
he had given the recordings to a korean-american businessman who leaked copies to the media after failing to blackmail samsung.
****
amphibians, a species class including frogs, toads, salamanders, and caecilians, are declining world-wide, a development beginning in the late 1980's.
scientists view amphibians as ``canaries in the coal mine '', their demise possibly presaging decline of human life.
threats to amphibian survival include chemically polluted streams, destruction of rain forests, pesticides which can trigger hermaphroditism, climate change, thinning ozone layer, over harvesting for food and medicine, and even the closing of australia's only frog hospital.
remedies to decline include creation of parks and reserves, reducing climate change emissions, and breeding amphibians in captivity to sustain vulnerable species.
****
the rapidly declining number of frogs and other amphibians indicates environmental degradation that may affect all of us.
amphibians' permeable skins and habitats make them an important indicator of environmental quality.
one study found that 32% face extinction.
reasons for this include habitat decline ( water pollution, pesticides), over-harvesting for food and medicine, and increasing number of lethal and previously unrecognized frog diseases.
corrective actions include reducing emissions that contribute to climate change, creating parks and ecological reserves, and breeding frogs in captivity in order to sustain vulnerable species.
****
frog populations are declining worldwide due to deforestation, pollution, habitat loss, climate change, pesticides, parasites, non-native predators, the fungal disease chytridiomycosis, hermaphroditic frogs caused by ddt and atrazine, and over-harvesting for food and medicine.
the large cuban tree frog has invaded florida and devours smaller native frogs.
rare protected frogs are smuggled to european collectors.
frogs are important sentinels for environmental problems because of the sensitivity of their permeable skin.
creating ecological reserves, reducing emissions that contribute to climate change, and breeding frogs in captivity can help sustain species.
china creates ``frog freeways ''to help frogs escape from ditches.
****
frogs are disappearing at an alarming rate across the globe.
frogs are very important indicators of environmental change because their permeable skin is extremely sensitive to any changes.
they are threatened mainly by climate change and fungal disease, but also by pollution, deforestation, habitat loss, and harvesting for food and medicines.
there was also a dramatic increase in the number of hermaphrodites among frogs during the period when ddt and other pesticides were widely used.
to reverse this trend, we must protect their habitat in part by creating parks and reserves, reduce emissions, and breed them in captivity.
****
the veterans administration recognizes 10 diseases and the birth defect spina bifida as linked or possibly linked to agent orange.
any american who served in the war is automatically presumed to have been exposed to the defoliant.
agent orange was sprayed on jungles by us planes for 10 years to strip away cover from north vietnamese troops.
vietnam estimates that up to 2 million of its citizens suffer from agent orange-associated ailments, but its studies are discounted by western experts for lack of stringent methodology.
vietnam has launched a support fund, managed by the red cross, for agent orange victims.
****
agent orange is a defoliant used during the vietnam war to strip away the protective cover used by north vietnamese troops.
it has a lingering toxic component called dioxin, which has been linked to three kinds of cancer and chemical acne among the vietnamese and in americans fighting there, as well as birth defects in their children.
however, it is virtually impossible to determine which ailments came directly from agent orange.
research continues and u.s. law requires review every two years.
dioxin caused widespread environmental damage in vietnam; precautions are taken as suspected caches of dioxin are still being found.
****
from 1961 to 1971, american planes sprayed agent orange over parts of south vietnam to deny cover and sustenance for north vietnamese troops.
cancer-causing dioxin was inadvertently created during agent orange's manufacturing process.
agent orange is proven linked to birth defects including spina bifida; cancers soft-tissue sarcoma, non-hodgkin's lymphoma, and hodgkin's disease; and skin disease cholaracne.
an estimated 300,000 vietnamese victims include local residents, soldiers, and their children and grandchildren.
deformed vietnamese children are cared for in scattered ``peace villages ''.
the u.s. first refused some veterans' claims but now assumes all 2 million who served in the war were exposed.
****
the u.s. sprayed 19 million gallons of the defoliant agent orange ( containing dioxin) over south vietnam from 1962 to 1971, exposing two million vietnamese and 2.1 million u.s. military.
vietnamese veterans and civilians have various ailments and their children suffer from physical deformities and mental retardation.
the sickest are tended in special villages.
in 1999 vietnam began a survey to find the exact number of sufferers, but 70,000 are known the u.s. veterans affairs department acknowledges agent orange can cause three cancers, chloracne, spinal bifida in offspring, and seven other diseases.
they have received 92,000 claims and treated 50,000 cases.
****
victor yushchenko, a candidate for ukrainian president, first entered a vienna clinic on 10 september 2004, seriously ill and unable to walk.
this and subsequent clinic visits determined positively that dioxin, a waste product of industrial processes, had been ingested, possibly from spiked soup, which along with questionably refrigerated sushi yushchenko was served the night of 5 september at a meeting in kiev.
yushchenko, whose face shown in many newsphotos was swollen and discolored, accused his political opposition of the poisoning.
yushchenko lost the election but fraud findings led to another election in december.
****
in early december, austria's rudolfinerhaus clinic announced that tests confirmed that orally administered dioxin had poisoned viktor yushchenko.
he was admitted to the clinic twice in recent months in serious condition.
yushchenko is in a contested election for president of the ukraine, running against the current prime minister.
a runoff election will be held december 26.
after dioxin poisoning was confirmed, the ukraine prosecutor general reinstituted a criminal investigation.
yushchenko believes the poisoning was political reprisal and the aim was to kill him.
the u.s. has denied charges that it financially supports yushchenko whose political rival is pro-russian.
****
vienna doctors confirmed that ukrainian opposition leader victor yushchenko was poisoned by dioxin possibly put in his food.
yushchenko alleged an assassination attempt by government officials who feared he would defeat prime minister viktor yanukovych in presidential runoff elections.
yushchenko had dinner and drinks sept. 5th with security service head smeshko and his deputy.
he had headaches the next day and was hospitalized sept. 10th.
his skin became disfigured, his digestive tract was dotted with ulcers, and excruciating back pain required huge doses of morphine.
doctors were optimistic about his recovery.
ukrainian prosecutors reopened a criminal investigation into his poisoning.
****
victor yushchenko, ukrainian candidate for president, became ill on september 6, 2004, after dining with security service officials.
yushchenko suffered severe pain, internal bleeding, and facial disfigurement.
he entered an austrian clinic where doctors suspected poison.
yushchenko accused ``government officials. ''
yushchenko won a november run-off election, but results were negated and a december run-off was scheduled.
on december 10 austrians confirmed he was poisoned with dioxin.
a criminal investigation was reopened with strong us urging.
this attack apparently was to prevent his election victory.
he had promised to investigate past assassinations and the administration accused him of us financial backing.
****
the chesapeake bay's maryland oyster has been decimated by over-fishing, pollution and parasites.
oyster harvests dropped 92% in five years.
as a revenue source, oysters declined from $65 million annually to $500,000.
there are efforts to save or replace the oyster.
at managed reserves, maryland plants disease free oysters, gives them 3 years to grow, then allows harvesting.
research continues on the asian oyster, successfully grown in seattle waters, to see if they will be disease resistant and not harm the bay's ecosystem.
virginia and maryland governors will decide whether more research is needed when study findings are presented.
****
maryland oysters, the shining jewels of chesapeake bay, are becoming an endangered species.
the annual haul in 2003 was about 23,000 bushels compared to 80,000 in 1993 and 2 million plus in the 1980's.
maryland and virginia have taken steps to protect native oysters, but both are considering introducing the chinese oyster as a replacement.
as optimism about the chinese oyster has grown in the administration of gov.
robert ehrlich ( r-md), pessimism has spread among scientists.
maryland has successfully spawned and raised native oysters in managed reserves under scientific supervision but the process is slow and limited in scope.
****
oysters are disappearing from the chesapeake bay.
once bringing $65 million into maryland annually, they now bring but $500,000.
they also brought tourists and, most importantly, filtered the water of the bay.
their decline is attributed to over-harvesting, pollution, and two parasites appearing in the 1960's, one brought by asian oysters.
maryland, virginia, and the national government are spending millions to save the oyster.
research centers harvest seed and maintain managed reserves.
sewer system discharge and farm run-off must be controlled.
some want to introduce a new chinese specie to the bay, but others fear the consequences of this move.
****
chesapeake bay oysters have almost vanished because of pollution, over harvesting, and two parasites.
they are critical to the health of the bay because they filter the water virginia and maryland have been spending several million dollars every year to restore native populations, and more than 330 million oysters have been planted since 2000.
virginia and maryland are considering introducing an asian oyster but others want more studies done on potential impact, since they could bring new diseases and problems and could squeeze out the native oysters altogether.
moreover it would be impossible to remove them once they were introduced.
****
after being dormant for eighteen years, mount saint helens in washington erupted with steam and ash on 1 october 2005 after a series of earthquakes beginning a week earlier.
on 2 october, another burst of steam preceded hour long tremors.
next day, a tremor lasting twenty-five minutes prompted scientists to warn of a more serious eruption but the nearest residents thirty miles from the crater were not evacuated.
an observatory five miles from the crater was evacuated and aircraft were diverted from the area.
tourists, however, flocked to the area, many disappointed at the minimal fireworks from the crater.
****
mount st. helens in southwest washington state erupted violently on may 18, 1980 killing 57people, destroying 200 homes and coating much of the northwest with 520 million tons of ash.
seismic activity beginning on sept. 23, 2004 released more energy than at any time since 1980 and on october 1 the volcano burped a tall column of steam and ash.
seismic activity ceased briefly but resumed.
on oct. 2 scientists warned of a more serious eruption threatening life and property.
officials evacuated an observatory 5 miles from the crater and moved tourists to a lookout point several miles below.
****
beginning september 23, 2004, building pressures caused several earthquakes per minute ( up to strength 3.3) on mt.
st. helens in sw washington.
on friday, october 1st, a 10,000-foot column of steam and ash rose for 24 minutes.
this first eruption since 1986 punched a hole in the dome's ice.
no evacuations were ordered.
close monitoring continued.
on saturday an observatory five miles away was evacuated as earthquakes intensified.
around noon the volcano emitted a burst of steam followed by a crater landslide, rotten-egg smell, and a 50-minute tremor believed caused by rising magma.
at 3am sunday a 25-minute tremor occurred.
****
a level 3 ( the highest) volcano alert is issued for mount st. helens, washington.
in late october 2004 there were seismic rumblings.
on november 1 a 24-minute 1,000-foot plume appeared.
after more earthquakes, on november 2 there was a brief shot of steam and a 50-minute low-frequency tremor.
on november 3, a second tremor lasted 25 minutes.
mount st. helens erupted in 1980 killing 57.
tourists gathered.
an observatory 5 miles away was evacuated, but towns have not been evacuated.
scientists are monitoring the volcano with aircraft ( sampling the air and detecting hot spots), seismographs, and global positioning sensors.
****
in amsterdam, on 2 november 2004, theo van gogh, a descendant of the famed artist, was killed by a muslim extremist, in apparent retaliation for the showing on tv of theo's film ``submission '', which depicted the spousal abuse of four muslim women.
the dual dutch and moroccan assailant, not further identified, who left a note attached to van gogh, was arrested immediately after the attack.
the shooting heightened already strained relations between the million muslim minority and the normally tolerant but now threatened dutch.
immigrant groups condemned the slaying but emphasized assimilation was difficult when feeling unwanted.
****
november 2, dutch filmmaker theo van gogh was murdered on an amsterdam street.
his film ``submission, ''about the treatment of women in islamic society, outraged the muslim community.
a note left on the body called for holy war.
police quickly apprehended the suspect, a muslim of dual dutch and moroccan citizenship.
eight suspects were arrested in connection with the murder.
dutch muslim groups in amsterdam condemned the killing and pleaded for dialog.
some 20,000 people gathered in a noisy tribute to van gogh, while opinion polls showed many dutch feel threatened by the nearly one million muslims in the netherlands.
****
dutch filmmaker theo van gogh, known for his controversial views, was murdered on an amsterdam street on 2 november 2004, in broad daylight.
the assailant, of dual dutch/moroccan nationality, was captured and arrested after a shootout in which he and a policeman were wounded.
the motive is believed to be radical islamic views; the filmmaker had received numerous death threats following the airing of an anti-muslim movie.
whilst admitting van gogh's views were hurtful, muslim groups condemned the killing and called for calm.
meanwhile, thousands gathered for a raucous memorial rally.
police later arrested eight associates of the assailant.
****
theo van gogh, 47, died in amsterdam, the netherlands, on november 2, 2004.
the dutch filmmaker and distant relative of vincent van gogh was shot and stabbed by a 26 year old dutch/moroccan muslim.
the police immediately arrested the assassin, although both he and one of the police were shot.
van gogh was vocally anti-muslim and had been receiving death threats.
fear of further polarization and intolerance in the dutch society spread.
twenty-thousand attended a memorial service and dutch and muslin leaders expressed concern, calling for calm and dialogue.
police interviewed witnesses, searched apartments, took evidence and arrested eight muslims.
****
after 2 months of testimony, attorneys presented closing statements in the murder trial of robert blake, actor, which now goes to the jury.
accused of murdering his wife of less than a year, blake pleaded innocent.
prosecuting attorney samuels emphasized blakes' dislike of his wife, his desire for a divorce, and allegations he'd tried a murder-for-hire scheme.
defense attorney schwartzbach cast doubt on the veracity of witnesses in that scheme and emphasized lack of physical evidence.
if convicted, blake faces a life sentence plus 9 years if found guilty on the attempted murder-for-hire.
blake did not testify.
****
actor robert blake is on trial in van nuys superior court charged with murder of his wife bonnie lee bakley on may 4, 2001 and two counts of solicitation of murder.
the prosecutor, deputy los angeles county district attorney shelly l. samuels, has relied heavily on two stuntmen who claim blake solicited them to kill his wife.
blake has pleaded not guilty.
his lawyer, m. gerald schwartzbach, has emphasized the lack of evidence against blake, attacked the competence of the l.a. police department investigation and demeaned the believability of the stuntmen.
closing arguments in the trial ended march 4, 2005.
****
actor robert blake, 71, is accused of shooting his wife, bonny lee bakley, on may 4, 2001 in a car parked outside a restaurant which blake says he had re-entered to retrieve a handgun.
blake is charged with murder, solicitation to murder, and the special circumstance of lying in wait.
blake pleaded not guilty and is free on $1.5 million bail.
prosecutor deputy la county da shellie l. samuels claims blake hated bakley because she tricked him into marrying her and he wanted custody of their daughter rosie.
he killed her after he could n't hire others to do it.
****
robert blake, a 71 year-old actor, is on trial for shooting his wife, bonny lee bakley, on may 4, 2001, in his car after dining at an italian restaurant.
he is charged with murder, two counts of solicitation of murder, and special circumstance of lying in wait.
if convicted he would face life in prison.
he pled not guilty.
the trial is occurring in the van nuys superior court of los angles.
deputy district attorney shellie samuels is prosecuting and m. gerald schwartzbach is the defense attorney.
closing arguments for the 2-month trial began on february 26, 2005.
****
coral reefs provide seafood and livelihood for one billion asians alone, many from impoverished areas.
over 58% of the world's coral reefs are endangered because of pollution, over-fishing, disease, and climate change.
reefs suffer from hurricanes and el nino-triggered bleaching.
coral reef damage from the late december indian ocean tsunamis is yet to be assessed.
about 30% of the world's coral reefs are healthy, down from 41% two years ago.
about two-fifths of those damaged in the 1998 el nino bleaching have since recovered.
taiwan is constructing artificial reefs to act as foundations to support new living coral colonies.
****
among the world's oldest and most diverse forms of life, coral reefs provide food and shelter to fish as well as humans, protect shores from erosion, and provide economic livelihoods based on fishing and tourism.
more than 58% of the world's coral reefs are threatened by disease, pollution, over-fishing, weather and tidal conditions, coastal development, and encroachment of introduced species.
their destruction impacts over one billion people and threatens over 15,000 species with extinction.
protection efforts include fishing restrictions, coral reef trade limitations, artificial reefs, satellite monitoring, and possibly the introduction of more heat-tolerant co-habiting species.
****
coral reefs are threatened worldwide.
only 30 percent are healthy.
reefs are beautiful, but also critical for ocean health.
in asia alone they feed one billion people and provide a livelihood for millions more.
fifteen hundred species face extinction.
threats include global warming, pollution, over harvesting of fish, introduced species, diseases, and other human factors.
the 1998 el nino and 2004 tsunami took a heavy toll.
solutions are hard to find.
a world conservation blueprint is planned.
a global coral reef monitoring network was established.
satellite surveillance, trade restrictions, and marine sanctuaries are options.
heat tolerant algae are being studied.
****
coral reefs provide food and shelter for fish, protect shores from erosion, supply seafood for billions of people, and provide livelihoods for millions; but they are threatened by global warming, diseases, overfishing, mud, and pollution.
only 30% of the world's coral reefs are healthy; 20% have been destroyed and more than 58% are endangered.
more than 15,000 species face extinction unless effective conservation methods are implemented.
the u.s. is helping by improved monitoring, satellite surveillance, accepting an international treaty restricting trade, and $10 million in grants, while taiwan is creating artificial reefs with discarded utility poles and tires.
****
pfc.
lynndie england pleaded guilty to humiliating and assaulting prisoners at abu ghraib prison near baghad late in 2003.
in hearings, england said her actions were wrong but early in the trial she contradicted that statement.
judge col. pohl stopped her and said he did n't want her to plead guilty unless she thought she was.
military judges can not accept a guilty plea if the defendant does n't accept guilt.
if accepted, a military jury decides punishment and defendant gets the lesser of that or the plea agreed to by prosecutors.
defense attornies are capt.
crisps and rick hernandez.
****
pfc.
lynndie r. england, on trial at ft.
hood, texas on nine counts including conspiracy, dereliction of duty, maltreatment and indecent acts, pleaded guilty may 2, 2005 to seven of the counts.
the charges concern violation of the uniform code of military justice that occurred at the abu ghraib prison near baghdad, iraq in the fall of 2003.
under an agreement reached with military prosecutors, english would serve less than 11 years in prison.
if her plea is accepted by the military judge, col. james pohl, her sentencing will be referred to a military jury.
****
at a pre-trial hearing at fort hood, texas, connected with prisoner abuse at afghanistan's abu graib prison from october to december 2003, under an agreement with military prosecutors army reservist pfc.
lynndie england, 22, pleaded guilty to 7 of 9 counts, including conspiracy, dereliction of duty, maltreatment and indecent acts.
two charges were dropped.
the judge, col. james l. pohl, who heard cases of the other defendants, refused to recuse himself and accepted the plea.
england said she knew the abuse was morally and legally wrong but went along because of peer pressure from colleagues and then-boyfriend, spec.
charles graner.
****
pfc lynndie england, a west virginia army reservist involved in the abu ghraib prison photographs, pled guilty to two counts of conspiracy, four of mistreating prisoners, and one of indecency.
she has a history of mental problems and learning disabilities and trained as a records clerk, unaware of the geneva convention.
england said that she was doing as she was told, that she trusted her boyfriend, spec.
charles graner, the ringleader and her baby's father, because he was a prison guard, an mp, and older.
a military jury will convene on 3 may to recommend a sentence.
****
on 14 february 2005 in beirut, former lebanese prime minister rafik hariri and eight others were killed by a car bomb.
a previously unknown group, support and jihad in syria and lebanon, claimed responsibility on al-jazeera television, the group citing hariri's ties to a saudi arabia unsympathetic to their brothers.
however, many lebanese blamed syria, which regularly interfered in the affairs of lebanon, where it maintained 14,000 troops.
syria denied complicity.
france wanted an international investigation, this unwanted by both saudi arabia and lebanon.
the u.s. joined france in seeking the withdrawal of syrian troops from lebanon.
****
former lebanese prime minister rafik hariri, and at least 14 others, was killed in a poweful explosion in central beirut, monday, february 14.
hariri resigned late last year after heading five governments for more than 12 years.
he'd helped lebanon rebuild after 15 years of civil war.
well over 100,000 marched in a funeral parade, voicing opposition to syria which has been in the country since 1970 and currently has 14,000 troops there.
opposition leaders hold lebanon and syrian governments responsible for the bombing.
led by the u.s. and france, international pressure grows for syria to withdraw from lebanon.
****
former lebanese prime minister rafik hariri was killed by a suicide car bomb february 14, 2005 in beirut.
six of his body guards and 10 other were also killed with about 120 injured.
two islamic terrorist groups claimed responsibility but opposition leaders blamed the lebanese and syrian governments.
hariri opposed syrian intervention in the lebanese presidential term and was working to make a comeback in the may election.
the opposition, france, and the us called for the withdrawal of the syrian troops.
the opposition and france called for an international commission, while the opposition also demanded the prime minister's resignation.
****
former lebanese prime minister rafik hariri was killed in a suicide car bombing in beirut on 14 february at least 14 others were killed and about 120 injured in the blast that hit his motorcade.
a previously unknown islamic group has claimed responsibility.
the opposition leader blamed syria and demanded that syria withdraw its 14,000 troops still in lebanon.
there is also renewed international pressure for a syrian troop withdrawal.
syria condemned the attack and denied involvement.
well over 100,000 mourners attended the funeral.
hariri and the other victims were buried on the grounds of an unfinished mosque in beirut.
****
in february 2004, britain's food standards agency recalled 474 products containing sudan i, a potentially cancer causing colorant imported from india.
premier foods apparently mistakenly added chili powder contaminated with the red dye to worcester sauce made by them for crosse and blackwell, the sauce also incorporated into other recalled foods.
an italian company testing imports for sudan i uncovered the problem.
the european union banned the importation of chili powder containing sudan i in 2003, the offending ingredient supposedly predating the ban.
the british agency launched an unprecedented probe but also downplayed the risk of severe illness.
****
britain's food standards agency ( fsa) recalled 474 food products found to contain the carcinogenic sudan i red dye.
used to color solvents, waxes, petrol and shoe polish, it is illegal for use in food.
however, the risk of illness is estimated to be very small based on the concentrations used.
the food safety alert was issued february 18 after italian authorities discovered the dye in a batch of worcestershire sauce from england.
the recall affects 12 eu states and china.
the fsa investigation into how the dye found its way into the british food chain is focused on three companies.
****
red dye sudan i, approved for non-food use, was found in worchester sauce in 2005.
britain issued a safety alert on february 18 and began withdrawing products containing this sauce.
eventually 474 products were identified.
residents, restaurants, and retailers were notified.
the dye was banned by britain and the european union in 2003, but was discover in indian-produced chili powder put in the sauce and probably imported earlier.
this dye increases the risk of cancer, although that increase is very small.
products had been exported to european countries, north america, the caribbean, and china.
britain has begun an investigation.
****
britain's food standards agency ordered 474 foods recalled because they contain the dye sudan i, used to color products like oils and shoe polish.
the eu has banned its use in foods because of an increased, albeit small, risk of cancer.
the foods were all made with worcestershire sauce which contained the chili powder.
all chili powder imported since july 2003 must be certified free of the agent.
since worcestershire sauce takes a long time to mature, the powder probably entered britain before the ban.
britain ordered a thorough investigation.
the discovery has sparked an international food safety alert.
****
an explosion at a petrochemical plant on the songhua river in northeast china on nov. 13, 2005 threatened toxic benzene pollution of drinking water of harbin, urban population 3.8 million.
the songhua is a tributary of the heilong ( russian amur) river on the russian border.
china pledged to keep russian authorities informed of the movement of the benzene-polluted block.
harbin cut off its urban water supply nov. 23.
the populace was advised to avoid all contact with pollution.
water discharge from two reservoirs was increased to dilute a massive slick of pollutants.
authorities are investigating criminal responsibility for the catastrophe.
****
a petrochemical plant explosion on china's songhua river resulted in an 80-kilometer odorless, invisible slick of benzene, toxic to humans.
contingency plans included discharging reservoir water into the river to dilute the pollution, keep the current moving, and prevent the river from freezing.
these efforts helped the benzene concentration to decline.
the city of harbin, where the river provides drinking water for 3 million people, temporarily cut off its water supply, and residents stockpiled water.
china also warned russia of polluted tributary water.
officials summarized past shutdowns and punishments for similar pollution, vowing to take tougher measures in the future.
****
on november 13, 2005, an explosion at the jilin petrochemical company released 100 tons of pollutants, including high-density benzene and nitrobenzene, into the songhua river in ne china, to create a 50-mile slick of floating chemicals.
water quality was monitored constantly and active carbon added.
patrols enforced non-use by humans or animals.
china kept russia informed since the songhua joins the amur border river.
the songhua supplies drinking water for harbin, a city of over 3 million.
harbin cut off its water supply for four days.
pollutant density declined with sedimentation, adsorbtion, and dilution as tributaries and reservoirs added water.
****
explosions at a petrochemical plant on 13 november caused major water pollution by benzene and nitrobenzene on northeastern china?s songhua river.
the density was almost 30 times the standard; the polluted swath was 80 kilometers long.
the water supply was turned off in harbin, population about 4 million.
the pollution has injured no one because timely countermeasures were taken: the entry of pollutants was blocked, reservoir water was released to dilute thee pollutants, and monitoring was increased.
the plant was about 150 km from the chinese russian border.
the songhua river is called the amur river in russia.
****
on december 26, 2004, an 8.7 magnitude earthquake, the biggest in the world in 40 years, unleashed a tsunami that slammed into coastal communities from southern asia to africa, killing nearly 150,000 in 11 nations.
indonesia's death toll had reached 94,200 and was expected to top 100,000 on hardest-hit sumatra island, and 500,000 indonesians were left homeless.
sumatra was the focus of a massive international aid effort with foreign militaries, led by the us, flying in assistance.
on january 6, indonesia would host a summit of world leaders from 23 countries to discuss the aftermath of the disaster.
****
an 8.7 degree earthquake off sumatra island, followed by a killer tsunami, devastated parts of asia on 26 december 2004, killing nearly 150,000 in 11 nations.
this was the world's largest earthquake in 40 years.
foreign militaries led by the united states are assisting with relief efforts.
china sent a quake-rescue team to indonesia, where nearly 500,000 were rendered homeless.
australia and japan contributed millions of dollars and japan committed to help with reconstruction.
supplies were sent by china, bangladesh, uzbekistan, denmark, and switzerland.
indonesia plans to host 23 nations in a summit to discuss the aftermath of the disaster.
****
aid has begun to pour into indonesia, hardest hit by the december 26, 2004 tsunami.
this tsunami was caused by an earthquake off northern sumatra that registered 8.7 on the richter scale.
aceh province and north sumatra were hardest hit with more than 100,000 killed in sumatra and 500,000 homeless in aceh province.
offered aid included $2.62 million from china, $146 million and military teams from japan, $764 million from australia, humanitarian aid from bangladesh and uzbekistan, and uzbekistan transporting supplies from denmark and switzerland.
indonesia has scheduled a summit of world leaders for january 6.
****
a massive tsunami hit coastal communities from southern asia to africa on 26 december, killing at least 150,000 people in 11 countries.
it was caused by the biggest earthquake in 40 years, 8.7 on the richter scale, off indonesia's sumatra island.
indonesia was the hardest hit, with at least 90,000 dead.
and its aceh province was devastated with at least 500,00 homeless.
sri lanka and the maldives also suffered tremendous losses and damage.
international aid has been sent from a host of countries, including the us, japan, australia, bangladesh, uzbekistan, denmark, and switzerland.