Fifteen people, including the two killers, died Tuesday in a shooting and bombing spree at Columbine High School.
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) -- Republican presidential candidate Pat Buchanan says stricter gun laws could not have prevented the deadly school shootings in Littleton, Colo. ``The question is who has the weapons, the good people or those who are ugly and warped,'' he said.
``The massacre is a tragic reflection of the dark side of American society,'' Buchanan told reporters Wednesday.
****
That case is set to begin on Tuesday.
and another falling down some steps as if he had been shot.
Friday, acting Justice Patricia Anne Williams, who refused defense requests to put off scheduling a date for the case, chose the Jan. 3 date after the defense lawyers said they would need time to go through the prosecution's evidence and discuss possible pretrial motions.
It was a point that Worth disputed outside court by saying, ``I don't think I have a conflict of interest, though it is obvious that Kornberg would like for me to go.''
****
 Three giant pandas living in Beijing Zoo will be sent to Wolong of Sichuan Province, southwest China, Wednesday and three others in Sichuan will fly to Beijing Friday, under an exchange program aimed to maintain the biodiversity of the giant panda population.
 Wolong is a famous giant panda habitat where the world-known China Conservation and Research Center of the Giant Panda is located.
 There are 11 giant pandas in Beijing Zoo and only one was caught in the wild, with the other ten artificially bred.
****
Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer said a Royal Australian Air Force C-130 Hercules aircraft now in Papua New Guinea on training exercises would be diverted to deliver relief supplies.
The injured, mostly suffering cuts and fractures, were being taken to a mission hospital at Aitape.
An earthquake with a magnitude of 7.0 is devastating if it hits an urban area.
The last tsunami in the area had been in December 1930 when a magnitude 6.5 earthquake struck the Admiralty Islands, McCue said.
****
The debate centers on whether the embryos used in stem cell research are human beings.
 It's a bit like the ability kids have to learn a language more easily than adults do.
 Maybe you know an adult with Parkinson's disease, a brain disorder that causes shakiness and stiffness, and makes it hard to walk -- symptoms that get worse over time.
Actor Michael J. Fox, former boxer Muhammad Ali and former attorney general Janet Reno are among the 1.5 million Americans with Parkinson's disease.
 Cures for these and other diseases, many scientists now believe, could come from research into human embryonic stem cells.
****
Through this process, Merck discovered that Vioxx did indeed carry a small but unacceptable risk of cardiac problems when used for longer than 18 months.
Did the 20 million Americans who used the drug since its launch in 1999 really have to spend that extra money and, as it turns out, incur a slight extra risk?
Vioxx was approved after trials held under the auspices of the Food and Drug Administration showed it to be effective (which it was).
Vioxx is a new-generation painkiller, one of several that are (or were) prescribed instead of aspirin or other over-the-counter drugs.
****
HONG KONG, December 8 (Xinhua) -- Hong Kong health authorities are stepping up the hunt for the source of a deadly influenza strain previously found only in birds which has caused a global alert.
World Health Organization (WHO) officials in Geneva said leading researchers would this week decide whether a vaccine should be developed, according to reports reaching here.
Investigators fanned out across the territory Monday, checking poultry farms for traces of the disease amid the speculation that it could have been passed to humans by chickens.
****
 The new agreement, an attempt to jump-start the effort, made more sweeping promises.
 The states issued a statement saying that the Asian oyster is still ``a virtual unknown'' and could bring diseases or other ecological problems that would spread to their coasts.
 Julie Thompson, a biologist with the Fish and Wildlife Service, said Wednesday that the federal agencies were concerned that the Asian oyster would be impossible to remove once released in the wild.
 Franks said Wednesday that all the necessary research has been compressed into a year.
****
``Patsy was able to throw up that morning because of gut-wrenching anxiety.
``Everything in our lives has been scoured,'' Patsy said.
LONDON (AP) _ The parents of JonBenet Ramsey, the six-year-old murdered American beauty queen, break a 14-month silence in a British television interview Thursday night proclaiming they are innocent and vowing to find her killer.
Help me to understand that.
``The single most important thing to us, from that day until even now, is to find the killer of our daughter,'' Ramsey said.
``God knows, and He's not telling.''
****
 Canada, whose exports of beef products are effected by a single case of mad cow disease since may 2003, has exceeded its mad cow testing target for 2004, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency reported Sunday.
The United States and many other countries imposed bans on Canadian beef after the discovery.
 Canada has been testing cattle for BSE since 1992, but boosted testing levels after a single case of mad cow disease was found in Alberta in May 2003.
 It is estimated the mad cow crisis has cost the Canadian beef industry and rural economies about 5 billion US dollars.
****
 Psychologist Maria D'Alessio said her study "shows the threat caused by commercials aimed at children and featuring foodstuffs, because it distorts one's natural relationship with food".
 Italy's TV channels broadcast twice as many commercials featuring food as their US counterparts, threatening children who watch them with serious eating disorders such as bulimia and anorexia, according to a study published here Tuesday.
 "In the coming years, we will certainly have to face the problem of anorexia and bulimia," in Italian children.
 D'Alessio said 40 commercials in every hour of programming were dedicated to food. "
****
It flies to Dublin, Ireland; Sofia, Bulgaria; Warsaw, Poland; Prague; Strasbourg, France; and several British airports.
 "Although there are precedents for both pilots losing consciousness at the controls of the aircraft in the past, for it to happen on a large airliner like a Boeing 737, with all the backup systems they have there, does seem to be really quite extraordinary," said Kieran Daly, editor of Air Transport Intelligence, a news agency that covers the industry.
 "The first indications," said Marios Karoyian, a spokesman for the Cyprus president, Tassos Papadopoulos, "are that it was not caused by a terrorist act."
****
They searched Internet databases for personal information on potential victims.
``They move fast to stay ahead of local law enforcement,'' said Inspector Phil Dito, who worked the Santner case.
He had 160 them when the police arrested him last October, including Florida driver's licenses with his picture under more than a dozen different names, none of them his own.
``They mastered every aspect of this crime,'' Wismer said.
In some cases, a criminal will electronically graft his or her photo onto a legally valid driver's license under another person's name with correct information.
****
He also cited links between psychological problems such as fear and anxiety with obesity, adding that psychological pressure could drive some people into ingesting large quantities of food that lead to obesity.
KUWAIT CITY, November 2 (Xinhua) -- More than 40 percent of Kuwaiti women are obese and suffer from other chronic ailments such as vein-hardening, diabetes and hypertension, local press reported today, citing a Kuwaiti psychologist.
People in Kuwait are usually kept away from outdoor physical exercises by the hot desert climate which lasts at least for eight months a year, and diet with much fat are their favorates.
****
KUNMING, June 23 (Xinhua) -- Xishuangbanna, one of China's largest tropical rain forest reserves, will almost double its area to bring more wild plants and animals under protection.
according to the local government.
The Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture of southwest China's Yunnan Province has decided to enlarge the reserve area to 470,000 hectares from its present 268,000 ha.,
KUALA LUMPUR, August 2 (Xinhua) -- Malaysia and Austria have agreed to further expand bilateral relations by promoting two-way trade, mutual investment, creation of joint ventures and third market initiatives.
****
Christianto said most of the wealth had been accumulated through business deals full of collusion, corruption and nepotism such as monopolies, rent-seeking practices and oligopolies.
Meanwhile, according to a survey result by the Indonesian Business Data Center which was published here Monday, the assets of Soeharto's family have reached 200 trillion rupiah (about 20 billion U.S. dollars).
He refused to disclose the details, saying that the investigation needs a long time.
Soedjono said that he has assigned junior Attorney General to carry out the investigation.
However, a foreign media once estimated Soeharto's and his family's fortune is worth 40 billion U.S. dollars.
****
In Anguilla, the government closed schools Friday and residents put up hurricane shutters, in case the storm veered in their direction.
It was expected to move west-northwest at 12 mph.
Hurricane-force winds extended about 105 miles from the storm's center, and tropical storm force winds extended another 175 miles.
It was too early to tell if the storm would threaten the Bahamas, which lie far north of other Caribbean islands.
Floyd was expected to be east of the Bahamas in about three days.
Still, it was recommended that people along the U.S. southeast monitor the storm's course this weekend.
****
 When the third suspect, Dutch citizen Joran Andreas Petrus Van Der Sloot, tried to help her, she refused, saying, "'I can stand on my own,'" the source said.
 John's attorney, Noraina C. Pietersz, said she had copies of the Kalpoe brothers' statements given to police, but authorities would not let her read the statement given by Van Der Sloot.
Holloway's passport and packed bags were found in her hotel room.
 Holloway was on the last day of a five-day graduation trip with 124 classmates and seven adult chaperons from Mountain Brook High School in Birmingham to this Dutch Caribbean island.
****
Sipadan is a world-renowned diving island off the northeast coast of Sabah, the Malaysian side of Borneo Island, which is shared with Indonesia.
The other tourists taken hostage are believed to be from Germany, France and the United States.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) -- James and Mary Murphy were just another American couple escaping on a dream vacation to a lush Malaysian resort island.
We really need to talk to our children,'' Mary Murphy told The Associated Press at Malaysia's international airport. ''
We really want to get to the phone.''
****
It is not known how or where this package was contaminated.
Consumers may return the recalled products to the place of purchase for a full refund.
Bil Mar is a division of Sara Lee Corp. The culprit, investigators say, is a strain of air and soil-borne bacteria known as Listeria monocytogenes, which is carried in the intestines of animals and can easily come into contact with raw vegetables, dairy products or uncooked meat.
The agency is studying whether some of the Bil Mar products might contain the Listeria bacteria.
****
 The victim's mother said the boy is "well-adjusted" and shows no signs of having been traumatized.
 Hillsborough Circuit Judge Wayne Timmerman said LaFave will forever lose her teaching certificate, must register with the state as a sexual predator, may not have any contact with children including the victim, and will not be allowed to profit from the sale of her story or personal appearances.
 "If we had continued along this path, this would have followed him forever," said the mother, whose name was being withheld to protect her son's identity. "
****
 An animal rights group on Friday lost a bid to sue a Japanese whaling company for allegedly killing hundreds of whales inside an Australian whale sanctuary.
 Attorney-General Philip Ruddock said the judge had upheld the government's view that it was not appropriate to pursue the campaign against whaling in the Australian courts.
 In rejecting the application, Judge James Allsop said Australia does not have a legal right to stop whaling in international waters protected by Australia because Japan does not recognize Australia's jurisdiction there.
****
Austrian army helicopters remained grounded in the town of Landeck, about 20 miles from Galtuer, overnight.
Snow fell heavily overnight, and the news agency reported that another 20 inches were expected by Wednesday morning.
Maj.
Other estimates varied.
Three people were still missing as of Tuesday night.
Houses, railroads and highways were buried by avalanches.
Swiss television reported that as many as 60,000 people were snowbound in the resorts of Davos and Klosters.
In France, blizzards hampered rescuers seeking French skiers and hikers missing in the Alps and the Pyrenees.
****
The group, chaired by Kuwait, met Friday to discuss Sudan's options.
U.S. forces carried out the strikes in retaliation for the bombings at U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, which killed over 250 people.
``The problem here is not the right of self-defense.
U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson defended the air strikes in a letter Thursday to Turk that said the moves complied with the rights of states to self-defense as enshrined in the U.N. charter and international law.
****
Stripping the bears of protection could eventually clear the way for hunting of grizzlies in that region.
 Federal wildlife officials estimate that more than 600 grizzly bears live in the region surrounding Yellowstone in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming.
A possible court battle could also delay efforts to remove federal protections.
****
 The report, based on statistics provided by the Chinese government, estimated that some 250,000 people died on Chinese roads in 2002, while more than 16 million a year are injured.
 "But what we do know is that the problem is very big, that China has the highest rate in the world and the number of deaths is going up very rapidly."
****
By the end of the day, 15 of 71 prospective jurors in the first pool had been dismissed.
Skaggs asked prospective jurors not to punish his client for the sake of redeeming this small town's image in the eyes of the nation.
Outside the courthouse, clearly marked protest areas were empty.
Both Henderson and McKinney are accused of first-degree murder, kidnapping and aggravated robbery in an attack that led to demands for stronger hate-crime laws around the country.
McKinney's trial is scheduled for August.
****
In their drive to win back the House in 1998, Democrats are counting on Latino distrust of the GOP to unseat Republican incumbents in San Diego and a half-dozen other districts nationwide.
The Wall Street Journal: -- Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan broached the sensitive subject of stock prices in a speech, saying that "very rapid asset price declines" can be "a virulently negative force in the economy."
Still, the Fed chief didn't predict a market plunge or even comment on its current level.
****
 He said the tribal chief, Nawab Akbar Bugti, had also set a deadline of 3:00 pm (1000 GMT) Saturday for everyone to leave.
 The whereabouts of Nawab Akbar Bugti was unknown, however, District administrator Abdul Samad Lasi said 90 percent the Dera Bugti population had left town.
 Abdul Samad Lasi, the top government administrator in the area, said Monday that several homes of Hindus near the temple in Dera Bugti also were damaged by rockets in the fighting.
****
``We pulled everything.
Nevertheless, some stores have voluntarily pulled ephedrine from their shelves.
Jeanne Spellman, a registered dietician at the Boston Athletic Club, said that creatine, a popular strength-increasing supplement, seems to ``have some promise,'' but she tries to steer (her clients) away from most supplements.
For Levitsky, who is studying the effects of several herbal supplements, memory-aiding products and mood supplements seem to show the most promise.
Motions to dismiss Metabolife's lawsuit were filed last month by attorneys on behalf of Blackburn and by those for Wornick and WCVB-TV.
****
 The plant will have a small tag with the engraved name of the dead person, said Akash Deep Baruah, chief forest officer of Nagappattinam district, where nearly 7,000 people died.
Some 3,000 fishing families in the region depend on mangroves, harvesting some 230 tons in prawns, fishes and crabs annually.
Also, many fishermen are scared to go to sea.
Government permission was required to set up any venture within 500 meters (550 yards) from the point up to which high tides reach.
 "The mangroves are the best buffer against tidal waves.
****
 Statoil pumped cement into the production well to permanently cap it and prevent any further leaks.
 "We must also complete the planned inspection program with a positive result.
 Statoil ASA said Tuesday it expects to restart its Snorre A offshore petroleum platform later this week, almost a month after a natural gas leak shut down operations.
 "A startup depends in part on maintaining our schedule for the remaining work," said Oivind Reinertsen, Statoil's senior vice president for the Tampen cluster of fields, which includes Snorre.
The company was partly privatized in 2001 when the state sold a 17.5 percent stake to investors.
****
 Officials at Roh's Uri Party said the government should stop the envoy's resignation from hurting cooperation with the United States about ending a standoff over North Korea's nuclear weapons drive.
 "The timing of his official resignation will depend on the settlement of his job," he said.
 Hong, however, would be allowed to continue his job for the time being until Roh officially accepted his resignation, the spokesman said.
Kim Dae-Jung beat Lee in a presidential election in late 1997.
****
But she had bagged the culprit, and stashed the body in her freezer.
 That's bad news if the Cuban frogs, known to hitchhike to new homes in shipments of potted plants, are breeding in Georgia, biologists say.
 Butler's capture of a 4.5-inch (11-centimeter) Cuban tree frog in coastal Savannah has caused a nervous stir among wildlife biologists in Georgia and Florida.
 The exotic amphibian invaded the Florida Keys nearly 80 years ago and slowly spread throughout the state, devouring native frogs and insects in its path.
Previously, the northern boundary for U.S. populations was believed to be Jacksonville, Florida _ 120 miles (190 kilometers) south of Savannah.
****
The federal government has paid some benefits to about 6,000 Vietnam veterans who developed cancer and other illnesses.
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) -- The Veterans Administration must review all benefit claims denied to hundreds of Vietnam veterans who failed to say their illnesses resulted from exposure to Agent Orange, a federal judge ruled Thursday.
``We agree with plaintiffs that the VA's approach is inconsistent with both the spirit and intent of this court's decision, as well as the liberal nature of the VA's own claims process,'' U.S. District Judge Thelton Henderson wrote.
****
 Yushchenko, who repeatedly claimed that he was poisoned by his political rivals, returned Friday to Austria to receive further treatment.
 Yushchenko, 50, spent a period at the Rudolfinerhaus clinic in September and October after falling ill for unknown reasons.
 Ukrainian opposition leader and presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko was the victim of poisoning by dioxin, his doctor said Saturday.
 "There were high concentrations of dioxin, most likely orally administered," the doctor told a news conference at the hospital. "
****
It's fading out."
At the height of oyster season, which began Oct. 1 and runs through the end of March, Harris' rolls out an all-you-can-eat buffet, featuring oysters served seven different ways.
We see the old generation that's passed on, and there's no younger one to take their place.
Both Virginia and Maryland have been spending several million dollars each year to restore native populations, and they are considering introducing a heartier nonnative species to the bay.
Opening a cold, tenacious oyster quickly without harming or slicing the tender meat within takes skill and gumption.
****
 The steam cloud poured from the southern edge of a 300-meter tall (1,000-foot) lava dome in the volcano's crater that has risen in recent days.
 Seismic experts scrutinised the volcano from aircraft and from the mountainside to determine whether further eruptions were expected from the volcano that has been extremely active for more than 4,000 years.
 A plume of steam and ash rose from the crater of Mount St. Helens on Friday, CNN reported.
 The 1980 eruption blew off the upper third of the mountain, leaving a gaping crater 2,050-foot (400-meter) deep, 1.7-mile (2.7-km) long and 1.3-mile (2-km) wide.
****
``On a day like this we are reminded of the murder of Fortuyn,'' he added.
Ali, who has renounced Islam, has been under police protection since the film was aired because of threats against her life.
 He called van Gogh ``a champion of the freedom of speech,'' and warned against polarization and intolerance in Dutch society.
 Tuesday's killing set off a new round of soul-searching and dismay among many people in the Netherlands.
``Everybody wants to make sure we all stick together, Muslims and non-Muslims.
****
 The defense established on cross-examination of Smith that the story never said Blake asked Gary McLarty to kill Bakley.
 "All sides have rested and the case is now concluded," Judge Darlene Schempp told the jury Friday.
 Cole McLarty has denied saying many of the comments attributed to him in the story, for which he was paid $8,000.
 The judge said closing arguments will begin Wednesday and the case will be sent to the jury Friday.
 The prosecution and defense both rested their cases in the murder trial of actor Robert Blake, clearing the way for closing arguments next week.
****
 "In the region as a whole I think we can expect very severe ecosystem effects," he said, adding the recovery process for coral reefs could take "decades to centuries".
 "You have a region where the marine ecosystem is stressed and degraded as it is," he told AFP.
 Beaches around South Asia devastated by tsunamis could be restored to their former glory within a few years, but the marine life through which the huge waves passed could take centuries to recover, experts said.
****
Lynndie England testified Monday as she pleaded guilty to seven abuse-related charges.
 In a sentencing hearing likely to last several days, jurors also could hear a prosecution witness who is expected to describe England's job performance while in Iraq, which included admonishments for her affair with Graner.
The most severe punishment was set at 10 years for Pvt.
Charles Graner, who orchestrated many of the abuses and will be called as a witness for England.
 "I had a choice, but I chose to do what my friends wanted me to," the 22-year-old reservist said at her court-martial. "
****
 At least eight others were also killed, including some of Hariri's bodyguards.
 Hariri had joined a chorus of objection to interference in Lebanon's internal affairs.
 Former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri was killed in a powerful explosion in central Beirut on Monday, Lebanese officials and medical sources said.
 The explosion, apparently caused by a car bomb, occurred around 1:00 p.m. (1100 GMT), when Hariri's motorcade of four black limousines escorted by jeeps was passing by in the seafront area of the capital.
He came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years.
****
 The Food Standards Agency sparked an international food safety alert on Feb. 18 when it announced that a sauce contaminated with the dye had been used in hundreds of British foods and exported to several European and Caribbean countries and to North America.
It was uncovered when Italian authorities carried out tests on a batch of Worcestershire sauce shipped to Italy from England.
 Britain's Food Standards Agency on Thursday extended a list of foods that could be contaminated with a dye linked to cancer.
****
 China's State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) said here on Wednesday that the Songhua River in northeast China suffered a major water pollution incident owing to the explosion of a petrochemical plant at the upper reaches.
 The finance department of the Heilongjiang provincial government has allocated 10 million yuan (approximately 1.23 million US dollars) specially for handling the pollution incident, said the official.
It also organized environmental, water conservancy and chemical experts to discuss pollution control plans, and beefed up monitoring work.
 The official said upon receiving the report, the administration immediately sent experts to Heilongjiang Province to assist local pollution-control efforts.
****
 The destination is Medan, capital of North Sumatra, Indonesia, according to the China Southern Airlines that operates the cargo flight.
 This is the second batch of relief goods China has sent to the tsunami-hit countries in south and southeast Asian countries.
 The two batches of relief goods, worth 21.63 million yuan (2.62 million US dollars), are mainly tents, blankets, sheets and food that are badly needed by the people affected by the tsunami.
 A Boeing 747 plane carrying 50 tons of relief goods left Guangzhou in south China for tsunami- stricken Indonesia Thursday, said an official of the Ministry of Commerce.
****
