LITTLETON, Colo. _ Vice President Al Gore on Sunday bid farewell to Columbine High School's dead, issuing a ringing challenge to parents and schools before a crowd of 70,000.
In his only comment that addressed the killers, Gore called for forgiveness.
Big-league sports teams canceled games in deference; Mile High Stadium now sports a giant Columbine ribbon visible from Interstate 25.
``They've been so wonderful to us,'' the 14-year-old freshman said.
****
The lawyers also said there could be pretrial scheduling conflicts because of other trials some of them are involved in, like the Abner Louima case, in which officers are accused of brutalizing a Haitian immigrant.
Police officials declined to say where the officers _ Kenneth Boss, Richard Murphy, Carroll and McMellon _ would be working, adding only that they were on modified duty and carrying no guns or badges.
They left the courtroom to the cheers of nearly 200 other officers, gathered outside the Bronx County Building.
****
 Nature preserve workers in northwest China's Gansu Province have formulated a rescue plan to save giant pandas from food shortage caused by arrow bamboo flowering.
 The Baishuijiang preserve and local governments have enhanced education about giant panda protection and asked locals not to harm the animals if hungry giant pandas enter villages to look for food.
 Workers in the preserve will move old and weak giant pandas and lure fit pandas to a new habitats, Zhang said.
****
The tidal wave smashed into the northwestern coastline near the town of Aitape in West Sepik province, killing at least 600 people, according to reports reaching here.
Another five people died in the Teles-Lambu villages.
Sixteen people in the devastated Arop village were confirmed dead, and two children had died in the Malalo village, which was wiped out.
Dalle said that at Warapu 500 people had been confirmed dead, while Malol village had 40 dead and Sissano 41.
No bodies were visible from the air.
****
 Unfortunately, treatments for the Parkinson's-like symptoms, like tremors, may exacerbate mental symptoms, and psychiatric drugs may worsen the physical ones.
Catholics believe that Christ is present in flesh and blood in the sacrament.
 Fox, who has Parkinson's disease, campaigned with Kerry in New Hampshire on Monday and filmed the ad after the event.
 "John Kerry strongly supports stem cell research.
They say it's not up to scientists or the government to decide which life is more important: the embryo or the patients who could be helped.
****
Vioxx and a similar drug from Pfizer Inc., Celebrex, have been touted as ``super-aspirins'' in numerous TV commercials that have downplayed their known cardiovascular risks.
 So why is Merck recalling the drug now?
Merck faces several lawsuits, including a class action filed Thursday alleging the company made false and misleading statements about Vioxx's safety.
 The second problem is the nation's almost exclusive reliance on drug companies to police the safety and efficacy of their own drugs.
 The withdrawal of Vioxx caused Merck's market value to sink by almost $27 billion.
****
A top Chinese official in charge of animal quarantines confirmed on Thursday that the H5N1 virus has not been found among chickens shipped to Hong Kong and Macao.
Because strict preventive measures have been taken for a long period, Zhao said, there has been no bird flu epidemic in recent years among Shenzhen's 168 chicken runs and 38 pigeon farms.
Inspections are under way to prevent a bird flu outbreak, such as random screening of chickens and checks on all poultry farms, said Yu, who is on a fact-finding tour in Shenzhen.
****
 But some oysters do survive in the bay.
 Norman Murphy is a middle-aged waterman who grew up on Tilghman Island working the bay, as his own son does now. "
Both Virginia and Maryland have been spending several million dollars each year to restore native populations, and they are considering introducing a heartier nonnative species to the bay.
 But first, the bay cleanup bureaucracy worked on official water standards -- figuring out exactly how clean the bay should be.
Then there's the bay they know -- sickly and murky and perhaps getting worse.
****
During a 10-week stretch this fall, the panel met only 18 times to investigate the case, a murder mystery that has fascinated the nation and much of the world.
They also toured the Tudor-style house here where the Ramseys lived until JonBenet's death.
JonBenet's parents have already provided police with DNA samples, largely snippets of hair.
The second anniversary of the strangulation death of the beauty princess will find the 12 grand jurors on a five-week Christmas break.
``They are still moving at this incredibly slow, Boulder pace.
****
 "Reaching this year's target ahead of schedule shows that Canada is taking its surveillance responsibilities seriously," Agriculture Minister Andy Mitchell said in the release.
 The federal government is increasing the number of cattle tested to 30,000 in 2005 and subsequent years.
The target was 8,000 cattle tested by the end of 2004.
 As of October 27, more than 8,600 animals were tested for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), the scientific name for mad cow, the agency said in a news release.
 The testing process is aimed at high-risk cattle that are showing signs of disease, such as aged or downer animals.
****
Because it affects you and all your loved ones."
 "Especially as an adult, you know you are a smart person, and intellectually it is the dumbest thing," says Walker. "
 "I was somebody who did everything," says Walker, who was valedictorian, prom queen and a three-sport athlete in high school. "
 Mention anorexia and images of young women immediately come to mind: Mary Kate Olsen, Tracy Gold, Jamie Lynn Discalia.
She does not eat in restaurants or at other people's homes, unless it can't be avoided.
****
9:37 a.m. (0637 GMT) _ The plane enters Greek airspace and is identified by Greece's Civil Aviation Authority.
11:20 a.m. (0820 GMT) _ Fighter jets make visual contact with the Cypriot jet over Aegean island of Kea, but are unable to communicate with pilots.
 Greek Defense Ministry and fire department said that the plane crashed to a mountain at about 12:20 p.m. (0920 GMT) near the coastal town of Grammatikos, about 40 kilometers north of Athens, just a few minutes before its scheduled landing time on a flight from Larnaca International Airport of Cyprus to Prague via Athens.
****
His partner in crime, 29-year-old Eric Shay, received a six-year sentence after pleading guilty to 18 fraud counts.
``They made master keys to many of the mailboxes in San Francisco ...'' Wismer said.
Santner and his accomplices applied for credit cards and loans and set up checking accounts.
Often, they'll hit different stores in different cities in the course of a few days.
Few scam artists are as sophisticated as Santner, a former chef with a knack for computers, and Shay, a former employee of the credit reporting agency TRW (now known as Experian) who is familiar with consumer databases.
****
The nutritionist also said a large percentage of Kuwaiti children are suffering from malnutrition due to bad feeding habits that cause iron deficiency anemia.
Regular food consumption between meals, the use of sugar in tea, and the consumption of an additional meal at Diwaniya (men's leisure time in chatting gathering) contributed significantly to the development of obesity among this group," she explained.
Twenty-eight percent of Kuwaiti men are overweight.
****
Satellites currently monitoring the region cannot see clearly through the thick clouds which cover the region for several months annually, but the RSSs can do that.
Brazil, which is in charge of the design of the RSS, plans to build a land-monitoring base in the Cuiaba city, located in Amazon's Pantanal wetlands.
Director of the Brazilian institute, Marcio Nogueira Barbosa, recently visited Malaysia to negotiate the joint launching of the RSSs, a project which is estimated to last eight years.
****
JAKARTA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Indonesian Attorney General Soedjono C. Atmonegoro said here Monday that an investigation on the wealth of former government officials, including former President Soeharto and his family, was going on.
And the authority to conduct the investigation is the Attorney General's office,'' he told reporters.
``ABRI is part of the government.
``I can assure you that his name is not on IKADIN's list,'' Haryono said.
****
``We're doing the same thing as everyone else: We're watching it,'' O'Brien said.
``We haven't gotten any calls at all today,'' a Home Depot employee there said.
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. _ Hurricane Floyd got stronger and headed toward the Bahamas Saturday, packing 110 mph winds and leaving weather pundits wondering whether it will hit South Florida this week.
Meanwhile, there have been no special water releases from canals, said Ann Overton, a spokeswoman for the South Florida Water Management District.
****
How many people have gone missing in the U.S. in the last three weeks?"
 Croes was a DJ on the Tattoo, which offers nightly dining, dancing and swimming, Wiggins said.
 Van der Straaten declined to give details on what they found. "
 A three-block area of beach near the Aruba Marriott Resort was closed as police combed the sand and nearby dunes and drained a nearby swampy area while searching for 18-year-old Natalee Holloway.
Police work takes time, they have said.
****
Sipadan, popular for diving, is an island off the northeast coast of Sabah, the Malaysian side of Borneo island, which is shared with Indonesia.
Citing the Malaysian police report, Puno said 10 of those kidnapped were foreign tourists, which include French, German, South African, Lebanese and Finnish nationals.
According the report, five staff members of the Sipadan resort, and a Filipino, a Malaysian policeman and four staffers of the Malaysian wildlife department, were also among the abducted.
The tourists were reportedly taken hostage late Sunday on a remote resort island of Sipadan off the Sabah coast, eastern Malaysia.
****
This fact has been underscored in the last few months by two unexpected outbreaks of food-borne illnesses: travelers' diarrhea, or enterotoxigenic E. coli, from potato salad, which sickened 4,000 people in Illinois, and salmonella in breakfast cereal, which made 200 people ill in 11 states.
That happened Dec. 30.
Pregnant women and their unborn children are in the greatest danger.
But Congress seems unlikely to cooperate.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) The FDA now deals with imported food only after it arrives.
WASHINGTON, November 5 (Xinhua) -- More than 250,000 kilograms of ground beef in 33 U.S. states have been recalled because the meat might contain a deadly strain of E. coli.
****
But police say he fell asleep at the wheel, which is reckless driving.
 FINANCIAL ('f' code)  BC-FLA-CITIZENS (Tallahassee) -- A federal grand jury has launched an investigation into problems at Citizens Property Insurance, state officials confirmed.
By STEVE BOUSQUET.
Its third-quarter sales beats analysts' estimates but profits fall on more restructuring charges in Europe.
For questions, contact Donn Jehs at (727) 893-8333.
 BC-FLA-LAFAVE-DEAL (Tampa) -- Debra Lafave, the former Tampa middle school teacher accused of having sex with a 14-year-old male student, will avoid prison under a plea deal announced Tuesday.
By BRIAN LANDMAN.
****
 Whaling opponents say Japan is using research as a pretext to continue the commercial sale of whale meat.
 "For the past week Labor has been calling on the government to take action against Japan in the International Court of Justice," Rudd said.
 But federal court justice Jim Allsop dismissed the application because a government submission said legal action against the company could damage relations with Tokyo and jeopardise Australia's national interests.
****
Four of the 10 who were swept away were pulled out of the snowslide -- shaken but alive -- by rescuers.
An argument between the two men followed, and Kartell allegedly shot Vajda in the head.
Police said he encountered 56-year-old Janos Vajda, who was believed to be the wife's new boyfriend.
Ng looked down at the defendants' table as the verdicts were read and showed no reaction.
Broadcasters Plan To Sue DirecTV WASHINGTON (AP) -- Broadcasters will sue the nation's largest satellite TV company over its plans to continue providing CBS and Fox programs beyond a court-ordered Sunday cutoff date.
****
QL;
As the diplomats toured, about 100 Sudanese women _ most in the head scarves of devout Muslims _ protested outside the factory gate, shouting ``America should be destroyed!''
UR; mo-eap
The podium at the rally el-Bashir addressed was decorated with pictures of Clinton and Lewinsky and bore the slogan ``Clinton: Screw Monica, not Sudan.''
Even among the few Arabs interviewed who defended the U.S. attacks, some questioned whether the targeted Sudanese factory really made chemical weapons ``precursors'' as U.S. officials say _ or medicines as Sudan maintains.
UR; El-Bashir also, 14th graf &UR; pvs-lm-ggl
****
 Nonetheless, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is preparing to remove Yellowstone's grizzly bears from the endangered species list later this year.
 A few of the many species of native flora and fauna illegally taken from national parks:  Threatened or endangered animals  Sea turtles (hawksbill, green, loggerhead)  Desert tortoise  California brown pelican  Steller sea lion  Grizzly bear  Spotted owl  Greenback cutthroat trout  Schaus swallowtail butterfly  Plants  Saguaro cactus  Galax  Ramps  Black cohosh  American ginseng  SOURCE: National Park Service
``But you will have success when there is proper funding and real cooperation.
****
 The study, published in the journal Neurology, examined the medical records of 247 epilepsy patients who were followed for an average of 10 years.
They may also consider having companions or supervision for more dangerous activities like swimming.
They should avoid driving and stress and should modify their homes to reduce the chance of accidents or injury, he said.
I think it's very good for safety."
 By mandating the use of seat belts and helmets for motorcyclists, cracking down on speeding and drunken driving and ensuring good visibility on all roads, China would be able to reduce road fatalities, he said.
****
``Russell Henderson was a witness to the beating of Matthew Shepard,'' Skaggs said.
He also warned jurors they would be seeing ``really, really graphic'' photos during the trial.
As he said this, Matthew Shepard's mother, Judy, who was in the last row of the courtroom, slowly looked down.
On Tuesday, Shepard's mother asked Congress and state legislatures to enact bias crime laws to deter future acts of violence.
Jim Osborn, who attended grade school with Shepard and remained his friend, stopped by the courthouse on his way to work.
****
Kaczynski, arrested in Montana in April 1996, has pleaded not guilty to the Sacramento charges accusing him of four bomb attacks, in which two people were killed.
David and Wanda turned in Theodore Kaczynski last year after authorities had mounted an unsuccessful 18-year search for the Unabomber.
He faces a later trial in Newark, New Jersey, on federal charges that he mailed a package bomb that killed advertising executive Thomas Mosser in New Jersey.
****
 A security official, who requested anonymity, said that paramilitary reinforcements were being sent to the region to support an already-strong troop presence.
 Bombs exploded on two trains in Baluchistan on Friday killing two people and wounding eight.
 The government and tribal forces fought a 16-hour gunbattle in Dera Bugti on Thursday that officials say left at least eight troops and 22 tribesmen dead.
There was no claim of responsibility for the attacks, the latest in a series of small explosions to hit the state-run rail network in the province.
****
``I have a feeling over time enough serious cases of addiction will pile up and enough adverse events will be reported to change that perception.''
But the revised guidelines allow companies to advertise the health effects of herbal supplements _ without having to conclusively prove their effectiveness _ so long as the wording does not suggest that the products prevent, treat or cure disease.
That complaint is at the heart of a battle between the FDA and Pharmanex Inc., which manufactures a product called Cholestin, which it sells as an supplement in Wal-Mart and other big chains.
****
 "You have a region where the marine ecosystem is stressed and degraded as it is," he told AFP.
 Lyle Vail, director of the Lizard Island Research Station on Australia's Great Barrier Reef, said damage to coral reefs from a tsunami would likely be similar to that from a cyclone.
Coral could also have been damaged by exposure to the air as water was sucked back from the shore before the tsunamis hit.
****
 "We are trying to seal the leak so that we can resume production as early as possible," he said.
 "Safety is our biggest priority right now.
 The suspension of operations means a loss of 130,000 barrels per day (bpd) out of a total of some three million bpd normally produced by Norway, the world's third-largest exporter after Saudi Arabia and Russia.
 Statoil said it did not know when production would be able to resume.
 No injuries were reported.
All other considerations will have to wait," Oeivind Reinertsen, a senior Statoil executive, said in a statement.
****
Kim Dae-Jung beat Lee in a presidential election in late 1997.
 The People's Solidarity of Participatory Democracy, an influential civic group, filed a petition Monday with state prosecutors against Lee, Hong and the Samsung chief.
Lee retired from politics after he failed in his second presidential bid in 2002.
 Ruling and opposition party lawmakers have urged Hong to step down but Roh did not comment on his fate, the spokesman said.
 Samsung apologized Monday over the issue. "
We sincerely apologize for causing turmoil over media reports on illegally taped conversations," the group said in a statement.
****
There are also passages beneath the ditches for them to cross from one plot to another.
 After inspecting the plastic film containers, agents found the brightly colored animals hidden inside.
 The three suspects were arrested last week at Brussels airport after customs agents grew suspicious about the large number of film rolls the three were carrying.
 Airport authorities have detained three Belgians accused of smuggling some 600 rare frogs into the country from Panama, news reports said Tuesday.
 The frogs are protected species and are valued at up to euro250 (US$300) a piece for collectors in Europe, Belgian media reported.
****
HANOI, Vietnam (AP) _ Vietnam is launching a support fund for victims of the defoliant Agent Orange, more than two decades after its use by U.S. forces in the Vietnam War, the Labor newspaper reported Saturday.
The fund, which primarily will rely on donations from domestic and foreign organizations and individuals, will be inaugurated next Friday.
Nhan said the government's strained budget might have delayed assistance, pointing out that a laboratory test of a sample for Agent Orange costs dlrs 3,000.
****
 Doctors at a Vienna clinic in Austria said tests proved beyond doubt that it was dioxin poisoning that caused a mystery illness in September that left Yushchenko disfigured and in pain.
 There is "no logic in such an accusation," said Taras Chornovyl, Yanukovych's campaign manager.
 "Evidence of American support (for Yushchenko) has surfaced more than once.
 Dioxin is a byproduct of industrial processes such as waste incineration and chemical and pesticide manufacturing.
 Yanukovych campaigners rejected suggestions that the prime minister could have been involved in poisoning Yushchenko.
****
 Without immigrant workers, John Graham said, he has only about 18 local laborers.
The oysters were spawned at the University of Maryland's Center for Environmental Science, then planted in the managed reserves, where they grew under the supervision of scientists.
 The managed reserve program is one of many efforts to reverse what scientists have called a disturbing trend.
In return, state officials promised to open up the oyster bars periodically, particularly around the holidays when demand is higher.
 That would be a major increase over current funding for the bay, which Warner estimated at $230 million annually.
****
The explosion killed 57 people, triggered the largest landslide in recorded history and blew 520 million tons of ash eastward across the United States.
 After the 1980 eruption, a lahar traveled 50 miles from Mount St. Helens, ripping out bridges and destroying homes.
 In comparison, Friday's eruption was a ``hiccup,'' USGS geologist Tom Pierson told reporters.
 About 20 minutes after Friday's eruption, the mountain calmed and the plume began to dissipate.
 But USGS seismologist Bob Norris said magma could be moving underground and he would not be surprised to see more explosions in the next days or weeks.
****
``On a day like this we are reminded of the murder of Fortuyn,'' he added.
Chief prosecutor Leo de Wit confirmed that the killer had left a note on Van Gogh's body, the contents of which were not disclosed.
 Friends and associates said van Gogh had received anonymous death threats after Dutch television aired his controversial short film ``Submission'' in August.
The film featured four women who claimed to have been abused by their Muslim husbands and who wore see-through robes showing their breasts, with texts from the Koran scrawled on their bodies.
****
 As early as the night of Bakley's murder, Blake ``did some suspicious things'' that led detectives at the scene to focus on him as a possible suspect, Samuels said.
 Cole had testified for the defense, saying that when his father told him of his discussions with Blake it was about getting paid to beat up someone and there was no mention of killing Bakley.
 "All sides have rested and the case is now concluded," Judge Darlene Schempp told the jury Friday.
 The judge said closing arguments will begin Wednesday and the case will be sent to the jury Friday.
****
The scientists were looking for evidence that the algae blooms are caused by human-generated runoff in the waterways, including sewage and agricultural waste.
``No one has ever had the chance to study the impacts of natural phenomena like hurricanes on reefs under siege from these harmful algae blooms that we believe are triggered by humans.''
 "Reefs provide seafood for one billiocautioned.
 The union made the warning during its congress in Bangkok, which brings together scientists and experts from 181 countries to debate the escalating extinction crisis and form a conservation blueprint for the next four years.
****
 England said she knew it was wrong when Graner pulled out his digital camera and started taking pictures of the episode ``for his own amusement.''
Four other members of the 372nd and two low-level military intelligence officers have entered guilty pleas in the abuse scandal and received sentences ranging from no time to 8 1/2 years.
England's attorneys are expected to argue as part of their mitigating case that England was led astray by Graner, whom she frequently sneaked out at night to visit at the prison's cellblock.
****
 The explosion, apparently caused by a car bomb, occurred around 1:00 p.m. (1100 GMT), when Hariri's motorcade of four black limousines escorted by jeeps was passing by in the seafront area of the capital.
He came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years.
 Hariri, 60, a Sunni Muslim, resigned last October.
 It appeared to be the biggest bomb in the city since Lebanon's civil war ended in 1990.
 Hariri died at American University Hospital, while former Minister of Justice Samir al-Jisr and former Minister of Economy and Trade Basil Fuleihan, who were traveling in Hariri's convoy, survived the blast.
****
 Sudan 1 is a red dye used for coloring solvents, oils waxes, petrol and shoe polish and it is illegal to add it to food in Britain and the whole EU region.
 Bell said the problem was uncovered when supplies reached an Italian company which tested for Sudan 1.
 "Clearly if anyone has any products throw them away or return them," he added.
 However, FSA chief executive Jon Bell told Sky News: "There is no risk of immediate illness and the general risk is very small.
****
 The Songhua River suffered a major water pollution incident as a result of an explosion on Nov. 13 at a petrochemical plant in Jilin Province, where the river originates.
 China will inform Russia at any moment of the latest situation, to enable the latter to make quick and timely responses, the spokesman said.
 Russia expressed appreciation of China's information, said Liu, adding that China will further strengthen the monitoring of the pollution situation and the level of pollutants in the river.
****
 A Boeing 747 plane carrying 50 tons of relief goods left Guangzhou in south China for tsunami- stricken Indonesia Thursday, said an official of the Ministry of Commerce.
The first batch of 100-ton cargoes was airlifted to Colombo, capital of Sri Lanka, Wednesday morning.
 The two batches of relief goods, worth 21.63 million yuan (2.62 million US dollars), are mainly tents, blankets, sheets and food that are badly needed by the people affected by the tsunami.
 This is the second batch of relief goods China has sent to the tsunami-hit countries in south and southeast Asian countries.
****
